The following is a conversation with Ryan Hall, one of the most insightful minds and systems
thinkers in the martial arts world. He's a black belt in Jiu Jitsu, accomplished competitor,
an MMA fighter undefeated in the UFC, and truly a philosopher who seeks to understand
the underlying principles of the martial arts. Jiu Jitsu is such an important part of who I am,
and I was hoping to share that with folks who might know me only as a researcher.
I think there is no better person to do that with than Ryan, who somehow, remarkably, I can say is a
friend, and also a modern day warrior philosopher of the Miyamoto Masashi line of especially dangerous
and brilliant humans. Also, his amazing wife, Jen Hall, was there as well, so if you hear a
kind of voice of wisdom coming from above, you know who it is. Quick summary of the sponsors,
PowerDot, Babbo, and Cash App. Please check out the sponsors in the description to get a discount
and to support this podcast. As a side note, let me say that renaming this podcast to just my name
gave me intellectual freedom that I really didn't anticipate was so empowering,
especially for someone who's trying to find their voice. I hope you'll allow me the chance to really
try and do that, to step outside of AI, and even science, engineering, history, and so on,
and on occasion, talk to athletes, musicians, writers, and maybe even comedians who inspire me,
especially up and coming comedians and musicians like Eric Weinstein, who yes,
will do a third conversation with soon. I think if I allow myself to expand the range of these
conversations on occasion, when I do return to science and engineering, I'll bring you perspective
and also a little bit more fun, and a few extra listeners that may not otherwise realize how
fascinating artificial intelligence, robotics, mathematics, and engineering truly is. All that
said, please skip the episodes that don't interest you. You don't have to listen to all of them.
Trust me, as someone who is a bit or a lot OCD, that idea is quite unpleasant, but life,
friends, is full of unpleasant things. But as Hunter S. Thompson suggested, and I suggest as
well, you should still buy the ticket and take the ride. If you enjoy this thing, subscribe on
YouTube, review it with Five Stars Napa podcast, follow on Spotify, support on Patreon, or connect
with me on Twitter, at Lex Freedman. As usual, I'll do a few minutes of ads now and no ads in the
middle. I try to make these interesting, but I give you the timestamp, so please skip if you
don't want to listen to the ads, but it does mean a lot to me when you do, and still please do check
out the sponsors by clicking the links in the description. It really is the best way to support
this podcast. This show is sponsored by PowerDot. Get it at power.com slash Lex and use go Lex at
checkout to get 20% off. I use it for muscle recovery for legs and shoulders, but you can also
use it to build muscle, endurance, or even just warm up. In fact, I first heard about this kind of
electrical muscle stimulation device in reading that Bruce Lee used it. He was an inspiration to me
as someone who practices first principles thinking, especially in a discipline where
conventional thinking is everywhere. He created a martial art called Jeet Kune Do that is in many
ways, at least philosophically in his hybrid approach, a precursor to modern day mixed martial
arts. There's a special kind of deep philosophical thinking that combat athletes or Jiu Jitsu
practitioners do that is unlike any other. I think it's grounded in the humbling process of
getting your ass kicked a lot that removes any illusion of intellectual superiority. I think
the journey towards wisdom starts when you humbly admit to yourself that you know very little or
almost nothing. Anyway, go to power.com slash Lex and use go Lex at checkout to get 20% off
on top of the 30 day free trial. This show is also sponsored by Babel, an app and website that gets
you speaking in a new language within weeks. Go to Babel.com and use code Lex to get three months
free. They offer 14 languages including Spanish, French, Italian, German, and yes Russian. Let
me read a few lines from a Russian song by Vladimir Vesotsky called Annabella in Paris,
that you'll start to understand if you sign up to Babel.
This song always made me smile because it resonates with my own life. It translates loosely to
she's been to Paris. Paris for a Russian I suppose symbolizing a fancy life and that the guy can
never quite fit into that kind of life. Expensive things, nice restaurants, cars, all of that.
I was thinking about what song is equivalent in English. Maybe Uptown Girl by Billy Joel is
similar in spirit but very different in style. I just watched the video on YouTube for Uptown Girl
and it's basically Billy Joel dressed up as a mechanic but dancing in a way that I'm pretty
sure no mechanic has ever danced. Turning the old cringe factor up to 11. Anyway, I always felt like
I didn't really fit in with the fancy people and that's what this song represents. But back to
Babel. Get started by visiting babel.com and use colex to get three months free. This show is
presented by the great, the powerful, the OG sponsor named unofficially after one of my favorite
musicians, the man in black Johnny Cash. That's Cash App, the number one finance app in the app
store. When you get it use colex podcast. The Cash App folks are truly amazing people and
are teaming with ideas for cool contest giveaways and all that kind of stuff. I've been thinking of
doing some kind of little contest and giving away 42 bucks to a bunch of people who win. It's not so
much about the money but the glory and the delicious taste of victory. If you have ideas for a contest
let me know. I was thinking of something like asking people to submit funny inspiring photos or
videos or audio of using Cash App or any of the sponsors of this podcast really or maybe even just
funny things related to the podcast like different weird places you might be watching and listening
to me right now. I'm pretty sure there's somebody out there right now sitting in a hot tub with
some wine watching me say this. I salute you sir or madam. I may be opening up some floodgates.
I deeply regret later so please make sure you're wearing clothes and whatever you sent me. There
will be no naked people in the hot tub as part of this podcast. I have integrity and standards.
Let me know in the comments what ideas for contest you might have. Again if you get Cash App from
the App Store or Google Play and use the colex podcast you get $10 and Cash App will also donate
$10 to FIRST. An organization that is helping to advance robotics and STEM education for young
people around the world. And now here's my conversation with Ryan Hall. Who in your view
is the greatest warrior in history? Ancient or modern? That's a tough question and again I'm
no historian by any measure so I'll probably do the worst. Like what are your best bands ever? I'm
like Metallica and you know so I'll pick the... Metallica just came out with a new album by
the way. The entire orchestra. That's kind of cool support. Metallica will always be one of the
greatest. Yeah that's why they were that example. They were a well known yet awesome band. Let me
say it's like Nickelback or something like that. But that feels cheap because everyone
makes fun of Nickelback. I don't know. I guess it depends on how you want to define warrior.
Something that I think about when it comes to trying to evaluate various people or situations
or things that I've read about or heard about are the circumstances that they were involved in
because I think a lot of times it's easy to look at the outcomes and obviously we live in an
outcome driven world and outcomes do matter but at the same time like you look at let's say what
Cuba has been able to pull off from a combat sports perspective. It's staggering. Like the
amount of successful Olympic level competitors they have in wrestling, boxing, judo. I mean
they're a tiny little island with no money and no people. That's shocking. When you think about
the Olympics in the United States doing well, of course we should do well. I mean Russia should
do well. China should do well. India should do better than they do. Honestly, obviously it means
like they're not into it as much or at least certain sports because they have the resources
people wise. So talent's not going to be an issue. So there's something to like where the starting
point is. Like that's the argument with like why people say Maradona if I don't know if you're
into soccer. Oh yeah, big soccer. Okay. They say Maradona is better than Messi because he basically
carried the team and won the World Cup with a team that wouldn't otherwise win the World Cup.
And then Messi was only successful in Barcelona because he has like superstars. He's playing
with other superstars. Right. Yeah, that's fair to say. I mean like you know there's a lot of
factors that go into let's say winning a soccer game and you know obviously Barcelona you know
particularly for various points in time at a ridiculous all star squad of world class players.
But you know let's say for instance maybe they didn't have the creative players in Argentina.
They needed to get the ball up to Messi. You know they didn't have like the NES and you know
the you know the again the backing there in the midfield. But because obviously Argentina's always
had ridiculous attacking players like even alongside Messi but they're like the three killers up front
and then a little less behind. So it's interesting you say that it depends how you define warrior
because you can probably take like some of the civil rights leaders. You can go into that
direction like leaders in general. But if we just look at like the greatest martial artists in
history in that direction. Do you have somebody in mind? I would say at least three that pop into
my head and would be Hannibal, Alexander the Great and then maybe Miyamoto Musashi you know
the two commanders and then one you know guy. But so it's interesting and then again you mentioned
warriors being able to make a lot out of a little you know Musashi's famous for winning duels you
know that were oftentimes one on one. You know the Alexander and Hannibal were you know military
commanders and one of them faced Rome and that was an interesting thing. Oftentimes you know coming
up with novel tactics, different strategies sometimes under resourced doing having to do
novel and crazy things. There's skin in the game. That's an interesting thing too. I think a lot
of times you know it's a if you're playing a video game I don't think you can be a warrior
because there's just no skin in the game. You get hurt, you lose, that's a bummer. It stings a
little bit maybe makes you feel slightly disappointed but you know Musashi loses, he loses. Hannibal
loses, he loses. Alexander loses, he loses and they lose. I guess the people around them lose so
that's almost like you could use even from a combat sports perspective of Muhammad Ali.
I mean you consider also their quality of opposition. Musashi was fighting high quality
opposition obviously Hannibal and Alexander particularly Hannibal were fighting unbelievable
opposition. Muhammad Ali fought phenomenal opposition but he had skin in the game both in the ring
and out and that actually meshes with as you mentioned like a civil rights you know type of
situation where you are under resourced, you're pushing the stone uphill and that was a neat thing
I think about Muhammad Ali was how much you know personal conviction the man had to have in order
to pull off what he was able to pull off both in and outside of the ring and that reminds me of
again some of the other great leaders or great fighters throughout history.
So what do you make of the kind of very difficult idea that some of these conquerors like Alexander
the Great and somebody that if you listen to Hardcore History, Odin Carlin who apparently Elon
Musk is also a big fan of is the Genghis Khan episode. You know a large percent of the world
is a can call Genghis Khan an ancestor. So the difficult truth is about some of these conquerors
is that there's a lot of murder and rape and pillage and stealing of resources and all that
kind of stuff and yet they're often remembered as quite honorable. I mean in the case of Genghis Khan
there's a lot of people who argue if you look at the historically the ways described
in full context is he was ultimately like given the time he was a liberator. He was a progressive
I should say. You know like in terms of the violence and atrocities he committed
he at least in the stories has always provided the option of not to do that. It's only if you
resist. You basically have the option do you want to join us or do you want to die and die horribly.
That's the progressive sort of that's the Bernie Sanders of the era. Nice. So what do you make of
that that there's so much of these great conquerors there's so much murder that to us now would just
seem insane. It's funny you mentioned it I think that maybe it's a human nature thing that we want
to or you know maybe or maybe a misunderstanding thing that we want to cast all of our characters
and ourselves maybe is entirely good or is entirely negative when you know I guess the
phrase or the saying you know one man's freedom fighter is another person's terrorist is accurate
and a lot of times I think you can understand as long as you're able to look from various people's
perspective. Like if you look at the TV show The Wire which was obviously you know widely
everybody loves The Wire. I thought that there were everyone I'm not saying anything that's
that's not been said before compelling characters from all angles whether you like the character
dislike the character you were able to understand the motivations of people doing various things
even if they did wrongly they did rightly you know we want to cast all of the demons throughout
history as completely inhuman when I think that makes it difficult for us to understand them and
we want to look back at the people that we think of as great and entirely great and I think that
we're you know we're experiencing the problems with this you know even right now socially and
politically as we're trying to look back and decide that people we thought were good or not
good or people we thought were bad are now good rather than going hey there's there's good and
bad to all things and there are as you mentioned the gang is con thing you don't have to fight back
you do I respect you for it but then we're going to have a conflict and then we'll see what happens
and if you lose you're going to be sorry that you did because I have to make it that way if I want
to continue utilizing this this kind of MO because I need to discourage the next guy from doing what
you're doing right now and ultimately though I guess that's an interesting thing imagine you
put every single person on planet earth in a cage crime drops you know also there are certain
positives to that and I it's just things are as they are it's difficult but that is ultimately
more the law of the jungle and I think that we're able to supersede some of that now in modern times
and I think we're fortunate but as you mentioned we look back and say oh this is horrible say no that
that just is what it is that's how life is at a base level and you know again if you're a lion
and I'm a gazelle I don't I don't really like it very much but we don't call the lion the bad guy
we don't sanctify the gazelle or the other way around so it's just it's interesting when you
pull back some of the controls that we put on our behavior and you know in modern life which I think
are generally speaking positive you know we get down to how things often are and at the same time
modern life was built by people like Genghis Khan so then you get down to the ends just to find
the means it's a tough question these aren't things with easy answers or at least if they are I
certainly don't have the the smarts to figure out the answers to them but it's difficult I would just
say people in the world are complicated and layered and depending upon which side of the
line you're standing on at various times you know you may like or dislike someone but I can't
remember it's I can't remember whose whose idea was this killing me but it's the veil of ignorance
I guess the philosophical you know you know idea of the veil of ignorance where I go is is sticking
everyone in the cage the right thing to do and I say or everyone me and I say well no why well
it would make my life easier if I just went over and took all of your stuff as long as you couldn't
stop me I mean of course that's a great idea that's what everyone does in every video game
but in Skyrim you steal stuff when people aren't around but ultimately you go well this isn't the
right thing to do because if I were on the other side of it I would I would not appreciate it it's
it's inherently not a good thing to do I'm only doing it because I think I'm gonna win and that's
a fine way to be but you don't have the white hat on I guess I would say so I think without those
philosophical underpinnings to rein us in you know I guess morally speaking it's very difficult to say
what's right or wrong and you'd say certain actions have a reaction almost like a physics sense
if you kill everyone in your way for as long as you're able to your life will be easier I mean
you're setting the table for someone doing the same to you when you're no longer the tough guy but
it is what it is yeah if you look at like the Instagram channel nature is metal it hurts my
heart to watch to remind me a comfortable descendant of ape how vicious nature is just unapologetically
uh just I mean there's a there's a process to it where the bad guy always wins
the the violence is the solution to most problems or the flip side of that running away from violence
is the solution depending on your skill set and it's funny to think of us humans with our extra
little piece of brain that we're somehow trying to figure out like you said in the philosophical
way how to supersede that how to like move past the viciousness the cruelty the just the cold
exchange of nature but perhaps it's not so maybe that is nature maybe that's the way of life maybe
we're trying too hard to uh we're we're being too egotistical and thinking we're somehow separate
from nature we're somehow distant from that very thing I couldn't agree with you more in fact I
think actually orson scott card you know was the writer of a great book called enders game um was
this was a statement that that the main character you know ender uh made in the book his brother
was brilliant um his brother was like kind of sociopathic brilliant kid that was ended up kicked
out of the school that they were all into for battle commander dealing with his brother taught him
that ultimately strength courage the ability to do violence for all the good and the bad of that is
one of the fundamental most important things to be able to do in life because if you can't
cause destruction if you can't cause pain you will be forever subject to those who can and I
think that you mentioned egotism I think that that that's a disease that could obviously strike any
of us but it's something that we're looking at now we're you know I think we should be unbelievably
thankful as people that live in the world that that we do um that we can walk down the street
without having to worry that I'm like well don't worry that that's six foot six 270 pound person
over there is just gonna leave me alone and I have a Rolex on but whatever and I'll be fine
because that person's decided to leave me alone because we've all agreed to live in this relatively
you know sane and or you know constrained society because it benefits all of us and we're doing it
because of a philosophical underpinning not because nature dictates it be that way because
nature dictates it going a very very different direction and the only person the only thing
stopping that person from doing something to me is either me that person or someone else
that will stand in between us and if I can't do it and there's no one that would stand in between
us then the only thing stopping that person is that person and I have to hope that they're either
disinterested or disinclined to do that sort of thing and I think that uh you know it's keeping
in mind that that that is the fundamental nature of the world whether we like it or not um is
important and I think the the quest to fundamentally alter human nature is going to be ultimately
fruitless and then also it's it's a little bit egotistical the lion does what a lion does you
know we we can try to box it in and we can try to you know guide this direction that direction but
you know nature is as it is and as it always will be unless we want to start to constrain it
significantly but now I'm starting to get into individual rights who put me in charge who says
that I should be the one to make the choices constraining because many of the most awful
things that have happened throughout history one group or one person has decided to constrain others
and we don't like Genghis Khan doing that well I'll do that on a little level
are there going to be benefits and beneficiaries absolutely but there'll be losers in that too
so I guess it's a it's a dangerous game it's almost like putting on the one ring you know
we remember when Frodo offered the one ring to Gandalf and Gandalf said no no I would take it away
I would put it on I would use it out of the desire to do good but through me it would wield
a power so terrible you can't imagine I think that's that's the big question for anyone that
decides that's able to have reach and able to have power I mean obviously I can't speak to that
but imagine you did have national level global level power how would you use it would you try
to change the world would you be glad that you did down the line I don't know yeah there's I mean
that's the thing we're struggling now as a society maybe it'd be nice to get your quick comment on
that which is the people who have traditionally been powerless are now you know seeking a fairer
society a more equal society and in in attaining more power justly there's also a realization at
least from my perspective that power corrupts everyone even if you're even if the flag you wave
is that of of justice right and so you know not to overuse the term but it'd be nice if you have
thoughts about the whole idea of cancel culture and the internet and and twitter and so on where
there's a nuanced difficult discussions of race of gender of fairness equality justice all of
these kinds of things there's a shouting down oftentimes of nuanced discussion of kind of
trying to reason through these very difficult issues through our history through what our
future looks like do you have thoughts about the internet discourse that's going on now
is there something positive yeah I mean we can pull out of this it's an interesting thing to see
I guess as you mentioned anytime you're wielding power whomever you are doing so carefully is
important and it's very very easy to look at the people that have power and that are using it poorly
or have used it poorly and go hey you're the bad guy and then go well of course if I had power
I'll use it properly and I may intend to use it properly and maybe I will but at the same time
we see a lot of times people are people are people I think that a lot of the I think if
you if you believe that that human beings are all one which I do you know no matter whether
you're here you're there you're you got two arms two legs a heart a brain we all live a similar
experience you know and obviously with variations on a theme but you know you're no less a human
being if I you're a person I've never met from China then then some person in Virginia it's we're
all we're all people and I guess ultimately if I believe that human beings are corruptible and
that power corrupts and that we're all fallible and we say and do things that either intentionally
or unintentionally that we wish would not I think that the I have to allow for a space of I guess
with the word it's almost a religious term but I guess it would just say grace and that's something
that I see disappearing from discourse in the public or maybe it wasn't there I'm not sure but
it's interesting you know watching this occur on the internet because also now no longer are you
and I just having a talk sitting on a on a bus stop it's now in writing everything's in writing
the old the old saying like don't put that in writing you're like don't put anything in writing
that's how you get in trouble and basically you know with with the degree to which everything
is recorded but recorded in tiny little bites it's very very easy for me to wave every less
little foolish ignorant incorrect or correct thing that someone has ever said or done in their face
to support whatever argument that I'm trying to make about them or a situation and I think that
you mentioned cancel culture or you know as it seems to exist obviously this is poisonous on its
face this is poisonous it's it's the sort of thing that doesn't incentivize proper behavior
I mean you look at let's say one of the great monsters of history Adolf Hitler obviously who's
done awful awful things but also for anyone that's a even a minor student of history did
some positive things as well we don't have to I don't have to embroider this person's crimes I
don't have to act as if there was nothing good a monster has ever done and nothing bad that that
a great person throughout history has ever done but imagine the ghosts of Adolf Hitler were to
pop up and go oh my gosh guys I'm so sorry I I know what I've done but I'd like to apologize
and start to make it right well I mean you'd hope that you know if he popped up over here you go
well I don't really like what you've done and I don't like you but at the same time I'm glad to
hear that you're attempting to make this right and push in a positive direction even if you can't
make it right because otherwise what am I doing I'm disincentivizing change for the better I'm
looking to wield whatever power I have in a punitive fashion which does not encourage people to do
anything other than double down on on the wrongs that they've made knowing that at least they're
going to have some support from the people that support that and I guess I want to you would
hopefully look at the use of the internet as a tool that can educate and I guess that I don't
like the word empower but empower people to do various things extend their reach but uh but
educate and learn rather than to further solidify little tribal things that exist which I think
everyone in humanity and human history is vulnerable to me look at the course of human
history it's deeply tribal and the tribes or the groups that have been on top at various points in
time have done a lot of times bad things to the ones that have not and you'd hope that we could
learn lessons from the past and rather than you know committing the crimes that were you know that
were committed against us recommitting them when we slide into the top position say you know I could
do this now but I'll not you know I understand the urge to to seek vengeance is strong of anyone
that says differently I don't I wouldn't trust you know but at the same time we go we have enough
experience in history enough experience in life enough hopefully wisdom you know time in to go
this isn't the right answer this is only going to replay the things the the worst parts of our
history not the best and I want to encourage positive behavior and if I just again further
lash out at people although understandably done done understandably I'm simply just going to
just perpetuate the cycle that's gone on to this point so you hope that even though we're seeing
a lot of a lot of turmoil societally at the moment and globally at the moment that I guess our
better angels can prevail at a certain point but it's going to take a great deal of leadership and
I think that we're we're sorely missing like a Martin Luther King style character at the moment
or a great leader and I just I'm hoping that one will show up for sure and by the way a word I don't
hear often and I think it's a beautiful one which is grace that's a really interesting word I'm
gonna have to think about that it is there is a religious component to it but it's exactly right
it you have to somehow walk the line between you know you mentioned Hitler I've been reading
the rise and fall of the Third Reich I'm really thinking about the 1930s
and what what it's like to have economic my concern is the economic pain that people
are feeling now quietly is really a suffering that's not being heard and there's echoes of that
in the in the 20s and the 30s with the Great Depression and there's a hunger for a charismatic
leader like you said there's a leader that could walk with grace could inspire could could bring
people together with with sort of dreams of a better future that's positive but Hitler did
exactly everything that I just said except for the word positive which is he did give a dream
to the German people who were a great people who are great people of of a better future it's just
that a certain point that quickly turned into the better future requires literally expansion
of more land it started with well if we want to build a great Germany we need a little bit more
land and so we need to kind of get Austria then we need to kind of get France mostly because
France doesn't understand that more land is really useful so we need to get rid of them
and look what they did to us in Versailles anyway
but so the jew the jewish uh the holocaust is a separate thing I don't know
well I don't know I don't know what to think of it because so me being Jewish and having a lot of
the echoes of the suffering is in my family or the people that are lost I don't know because
Hitler wrote all about it in Mein Kampf so I don't know if the evil he committed was there all along
I mean and that that's where the question of forgiveness I mean Hitler is such a difficult
person to talk about but it's the question of on cancer culture who is deserving of forgiveness
and who's not like the holocaust survivors that I've read about that I've heard the interviews with
they've often spoken about the fact that the way for them to let go to overcome the atrocities that
they've experienced is to forgive like forgiveness is the way out for them it's interesting to think
about I don't know I don't know I don't know if we're even a society ready to even contemplate
an idea of forgiveness for Hitler it's it's an interesting idea though it was it's a good
thought exercise at the very least to think about like all these people that are being cancelled
for doing bad things of different degrees think of like Louis C.K. or somebody like that for being
not a good person but like what is the path for forgiveness and also what's a good person
what is the good person if that's a sliding scale that we could all find ourselves looking at
the uncomfortable end of a gun on you know particularly down the line I mean you hope for
the best but these definitions I guess like you said are important and who's doing the
canceling who's being cancelled I'm not necessarily as you said saying that that's entirely unjustified
or certainly not it's certainly understandable and particularly you mentioned like a monster
like an Adolf Hitler but it's also interesting I couldn't help but notice like you mentioned
as a society us being able to apply forgiveness to someone who's done so much horror but people
who are personal I mean of course many that so many people in person affected but directly
personally affected someone a survivor of the Holocaust being able to let go on that I'm
nowhere near big enough person for that sort of thing but I guess that's that's an interesting
thing you know being the person who was physically there potentially able to able to let go I don't
know that's that's unbelievably powerful it's it's interesting I guess you have to wonder sometimes
and this isn't obviously in regards to that to the Holocaust but why I'm holding on to various
things have I what is it doing for me and what is it doing to me is it facilitative is it not
and I guess that's something else that I really enjoy when I was on Ultimate Fighter
they they don't let you have any music or any books out in religious text so I've brought a
Bible and I brought a Koran and I started to read them side by side and it was it was really
interesting reading the Bible's a little drier Koran's the Koran's more interesting at least
written but I think something that that was consistently brought up was the way most merciful
people want I don't think any of us want justice we think we want justice but I don't think we want
justice justice is dangerous dangerous dangerous game because maybe this person's wronged me deeply
and I want justice I want to balance it out because what is justice is not a balancing of
the scales and sometimes you can understand it and on a societal level I think it's fine I mean
there's crime and punishment and we can go for the benefits and the drawbacks of that but I think
what any of us want is mercy within reason you know grace as you mentioned because justice is a
very very very dangerous thing and it's a valuable and important thing but who gets to decide what's
just what justice is actually needed out maybe I get to meet out justice but it's not I don't get
my comeuppance well that sounds great but what happens when it's pointed back at me and I guess
that comes back to the veil of ignorance you know the idea that that one day I will have to live in
the world in which I've envisioned and the world in which I've created I think that a lot of times
people love the idea of they're a judge for your crimes and a lawyer for theirs and I heard that
the other day I thought it was great and I think that's it that's a dangerous thing and hopefully
it gives us all pause before rightly or wrongly but always understandably you know wielding
serious power. Yeah justice is a kind of drug so if you look at history it's also been reading a
lot about Stalin I mean all those folks really I don't know I don't know what was inside Hitler's
head actually that he's a tricky one because I think he was legitimately insane Stalin was not
and Stalin was like he literally thought he's doing a good thing he literally thought for the
entirety of the time that communism is going to bring like that's the utopia and he's going to
create a happy world and in his there in his mind were ideas of justice of fairness of happiness of
of yeah human flourishing and that's that's a drug and it's somehow sadly
pollutes the mind when you start thinking like that what's good for society and believing that
you have a good sense of what's good for society that's intoxicating especially when others around
you're feeling the same way and then you start like building up this movement and you forget
that you are just like a you're you're like barely recently evolved from an ape like you
don't know what the hell you're doing and then you start like killing witches or whatever like
you start you start doing they did math let's be honest though I mean sometimes you got a
witch has to go I wish yeah we can all agree that which a witch has to go if it floats or sinks
which one I forget which which whichever one we need at the time is it floating it should have
sunk yeah but yeah we can definitely agree that witches have to go because you brought it up I
tweeted recently but also just I'm one of the things I'm really ashamed of in my life is
is I haven't really read almost any of the sci fi classics really yeah so like I my whole journey
through reading was through like the literary philosophers I would say like Camus, Hesse,
Dostoevsky, Kafka like that place like that's a kind of sci fi world in itself but it's it just
it creates a world in which the the deepest questions about human nature can be explored
I didn't realize this but the sci fi world is the same it just puts it in a it like removes it
from any kind of historical context where you can explore those same ideas in like space somewhere
elsewhere in a different time in different place it allows you almost like more freedom to like
construct these artificial things where you can just do crazy crazy kind of human experiments so
I'm now working through it the books on my list are the foundation series by Isaac Asimov, Dune,
Snow Crash by Neil Stevenson and Ender's Game like you mentioned that's just kind of and then
so I posted that and then of course like Elon Musk, John Carmack I don't know if you know him
creator of doom and quake oh cool see they all pitched in these nerds these alternate just started
like going like these uh you need to read this that and and the other so I've like started working
out okay but it seems like the list I've mentioned holds up somewhat is there a book is there sci fi
by books or series or authors that that you find are just amazing maybe another way to ask that is
like what's the greatest sci fi book of all time well I'd like to start by uh sharing something that
I I'm embarrassed about yeah is that I haven't read anything other than uh you know Orson Scott
Card jr Tolkien uh Frank Herbert Tolkien yeah yeah yeah I'm aware through Wikipedia and through through
surface reading of things that like a book called the Republic was written once um there were some
other good ones so you're a prolific reader of Wikipedia articles well or occasional okay exactly
and in between uh whatever else it is that I waste my time on but but yeah so I also I should say I
posted on reddit questions for uh Ryan Hall and there's like a million questions but like uh half
of them have to do with dune no not really but like people bring up dune I don't understand why I
I did you mention dune before home well actually we actually have a show you're all actually made
us a gi a dune themed gi one time which I thought was kind of cool I'll send you I'll give you one
we got extra but uh actually to your to your point actually this is uh Orson Scott card quote
actually the writer of Ender's Game um fiction because it's not about somebody who actually lived
in the real world always has the possibility about of being about oneself and I think that's a
neat thing because I have heard you know other very people whom I respect and very sharp people
actually every now and then dig their heels and go in I don't like fiction I only like nonfiction
it's more it's more instructive and I would go I completely disagree with that I think we have a
hard enough time figuring out what happened at 7 11 3 hours ago that let me tell you what happened
600 years BC I'm like hey I'm interested but don't tell me this isn't a story too yeah there's
there's there's actually there's factual components I have no doubt but we struggle sometimes to
like I guess what I like about fiction is that you can tell me a story it's all about people
I mean every now there's more and less believable things and I think dune would be an unbelievably
well written in my opinion for to run you know what do I know but I really like dune I'll say that
well written example of you know human beings interacting with one another the political
component to that the emotional the intellectual the relationship components all of that and
I think that dune is neat because it's a sci fi novel but only in the only in the loosest sense
it's it's really a story about religion about group dynamics about human potential about
belief learning politics governance ecology it's the best stories remind me of history the same
way history hopefully is not just a list of facts that I try to be able to recall or factoids that
I try to recall but a story that I can understand and and see how how the threads of time kind of
came together and created certain things and a lot of times like we say I'm like I have the heck is
what's going on right now or a hundred years from now or a hundred years in the past happened
and you can look back far enough if we had accurate knowledge if we had that like that
hypothetical perfect pool shot you know at the beginning of time we would see an unbroken chain
of events that led us to where we are and and where we are will potentially lead us to where
we're going which is again why hindsight's helpful but I think it's neat like I guess I really enjoy
for instance a book like dune and they're actually making a movie out of it which I'm
skeptical of to be honest because it's it's going to be difficult to to bring that to the screen
for a variety of reasons but there's at least a hundred questions ask Ryan what do you think
about the new dune movie I am not enough of an authority to have any sort of decent opinion
but I guess what I would say is so much of it goes on in the character's mind like how much of any of
our days is any lived experience as it were is internal that the majority how many times are
people walking around and you know they can be like hey what do you see right now I'm like oh
well I see this picture I see a wall hey there's legs but really what was what I was paying attention
to it was what was going on inside of my head for a moment and almost the rest of the world
tuned out and kind of dimmed and I guess that I think that's going to be a struggle to to anytime
you want to bring that type of a written story to to a visual medium I think it's going to be more
difficult but it'll it'll be interesting it's definitely my one of my favorite stories and
it's been it's honestly helped me become better at life in my opinion better than martial arts
and I think the the writer I think Frank Herbert was absolutely brilliant whether those were all
his ideas which in reality none of us are all of our good ideas aren't ours were a combination
maybe came up with something you're a curator of other good ideas and some things you borrowed
from somewhere without even realizing it but I think the the way the message is in the themes
and the ideas that were conveyed particularly in the original novel are just absolutely brilliant
is that the is that to you one of the greats and and the flip side of that like or another
way to ask that is like if somebody's new to sci fi is that something you would recommend
that that is an entry point I'm not well read enough in the sci fi world I haven't written a
lot of like Isaac Asimov or anything like that but I just I'll recommend dune I'll be an obnoxious
like evangelist for dune to anyone who'll listen so I yeah I would strongly recommend it so the
other thing you mentioned now I should probably be talking to you about much more important things
but the other thing you mentioned is Skyrim do you play video games what's your favorite game what's
what would you say is the greatest video game of all time because I'm a huge fan of elder scrolls
oh cool yeah I I mean I play a little bit um at this point you know a little little less
finally moves into a new house so you're like an adult no oh no no I'm like a better funded 12 year
old um yeah that's yeah that's entirely that's entirely accurate better funded 12 year old but um
somewhat better funded 12 year old not as well fun as I wish but whatever please you play video
games oh yeah I played as a kid I was you know again I've always liked playing sports and and
liked reading and I always enjoyed video games but my favorite video game I think I've ever played
was nights at the old republic it was a star wars game a huge star wars fan until it become less so
so recently Disney um you don't like the I haven't watched it yet oh medallori oh don't go
oh actually like medallorian that was that was actually pretty cool yeah waving this off yeah
canceled yeah I will if I could cancel one thing I would cancel Disney Star Wars I'm gonna edit
that part out okay let's go to the next but uh this is where if people are wondering if you're
watching this on YouTube and like the dislike amount is like 80% that's because of that comment so
so good job good job for making the internet I regret nothing now what about uh baby Yoda
yeah I guess he's like he's little he's got ears and he uses the force sometimes and he
passes out again nope no qualms of baby Yoda yeah you don't have a heart okay
let's go to jiu jitsu if it's okay uh so the audience of this podcast may not know much about
jiu jitsu or they do because it's really part of the culture now but they don't really know much
they see that so many people have fallen in love with it have been transformed through it but they
don't know much about like what is this thing is there a way you could sort of try to explain the
what is jiu jitsu what is the essence of this martial art that's captured the minds and hearts of
so many people in the world I think that jiu jitsu is is a philosophy that's expressed physically
and that it's the kind of development of the mental capacity and physical capacity working in in
unison to uh move efficiently and almost flowingly unresistingly with with a given situation with a
with a physically resisting opponent um learning how to generate force on your own and how to
steal force from the floor how to steal force from the other person and move in concert with it as
opposed to clash against which if you watch two untrained people fight it's almost entirely a
clash it's a runaway and clash a runaway and clash um if you watch jiu jitsu done well it's
it it looks like water moving around a solid structure and and I think that that is expressed
physically and I think that all of the things that anyone has really been able to do very very well
in jiu jitsu end up kind of exemplifying that but I think that that's true of martial arts in
general I think that a lot of times like the clashing that we see going on um and working well
is just the fact that you know you get very very physically powerful people every now and then
they're able to get away with this but I don't think that that's and that's that's fantastic
because ultimately it's a results driven thing but I think that the essence of the martial arts
is learning how to make more out of less and how to move with and be yielding you know almost like
real life aikido and uh so you think of martial arts uh jiu jitsu as uh like water or flowing so
aikido so moving around the the force as opposed to sort of maybe the wrestling mindset is finding
a leverage where you can apply an exceptional amount of force so like so like maximizing the
application of force I guess maybe that's a better way to I'd like to marry the two ideas you know
because I think you flow until the point at which you are the greater force at which point in time
you can apply but uh if you look at the best wrestlers and then when I say best I don't necessarily
mean most successful although of course most successful are always very very good um throughout
the course of history in boxing in wrestling in judo um they they're magical they they disappear
and reappear it's like fighting a ghost that that is like incorporeal when you want to find it but
then when you don't want it to find it when you don't want to find it it finds you and uh I think
that we see that in the like the buvaisar cites use of wrestling um and you know I guess you could
look at uh Floyd Mayweather or willy pep or uh you know pernell whitaker in boxing um as brilliant
examples of disappearing and reappearing and when you're strong it's almost like a real warfare
when you're strong I'm nowhere to be found when you're weak you can't get rid of me
and I think that's what we're looking for yes the tier brothers are incredible at that they just
they look like uh skinny starbucks baristas and uh they just manhandle everybody like effort effortlessly
they look like they just kind of woke up yeah rolled out of bed fighting for like the the
the gold medal at the olympics and just effortlessly throw uh like there's a match against you I guess
yola maro yeah so like you you know if you look at like who is the guy who's like intimidating in
this case uh and the terrifying looking it's uh it's it's the over maro just like a physical
specimen obviously like a super accomplished wrestler I think this is for the gold medal yeah
and 2000 2000 yes and then there this is the year you all took silver
and what you like just to just show you like there's a inside trip effortless
uchi and he does it again you know you know it's a really creative kind of wrestling where
it's organic yeah you throw in all of these kinds of things there's just a mix of judo a mix of
like weird kind of moves it's not like as funky as uh ben askern it's it's just like legitimate
basic well it's not funky for funky sake and i'm not poking ben askern to imply that that's
what he's doing but it's like it's funny it's like a lot of times it's almost like a musashi
talked a lot about that you know that the only goal of combat is to win is the outcome is it's
outcome driven versus like flourishing you know cool looking movements it's like unless that had a
utilitarian purpose like what are you wasting your time with that both in the fight and also
you know in practice but but as you mentioned it's almost like it looks like judo it looks
like wrestling it looks like jujitsu it's almost like I guess that reminds me all of the martial
arts is again deeply tribal as well I I want to learn lex fridman martial arts and then I want to
learn another you know I guess transcendent person's martial arts and it just happened to be the set
of movements that you tended to do most of the time thanks to your body type and your opposition
and whatnot but then I try to codify that and force those to work as opposed to going I want to
understand how the body works in concert and in congress with something else and other forces
and move appropriately and that's why it's like it always struck me that the Scythe Brothers are
great examples of just moving like water but they used Bruce Lee which is a little trite but again
he's brilliant it's like water can flow or water can crash and they would crash when they needed to
crash and they would flow when they needed to flow but they would flow for the purpose of
dissipating and then crash when they would win and at the right moment then go back to flowing the
second that the other person found them and it's just it's beautiful to watch it's artistic and I
think that that great expression of anything physical is ultimately studied as a science but
expressed as an art and I think that that's something that gets lost in jujitsu a lot of
times when it gets a little bit a little nerdy like do this hand to your hand here like if
like the more details I have the better one in reality that's just not not in my experience how
it's done. It might be a fun exercise of saying like what are the main positions and submissions
in the art of jujitsu. You don't have to be complete that's a ridiculously I apologize for
putting on a spot like this but it might be a nice exercise to think through it. Sure I mean I
would just say that you have your arms bend in various ways. You have key lock americana,
straight arm locks, kimoa plata, kimoa plata is a kimoa or kimoa is a kimoa plata. It's just
executed. Submissions. So like. Submissions. Breaking off your arm in all kinds of ways.
But ultimately the question is let's say you were a terminator like a robot that I which of
course you are. Go on. Go on. It's like it's a work being completely literal. And I couldn't
harm you with any of these things. Would I still use these positions? The answer is yes. They create
leverage. They create control. They create shapes that I can affect and that can affect me. And
they can be affected through other forces than other objects or structures like the ground
or the wall. I really enjoy mixed martial arts because there's another component rather than
just me and you and the floor. There's me, you, the floor and the wall. And it's another player
in the game that doesn't exist in a grappling context with a non enclosed you know I guess area
of combat. But you can strangle me or choke me. What do you call it? Without my arms being
involved or you can use one of my shoulders to pin one side of my one carotid artery off and you
can enclose the other. You can turn my knee in the exact same ways that you can turn my arm
straight this way and that way. You can add a rotation to that or it can be directly linear
against the joint. So I guess what I would say is the more that I've been able to understand
jujitsu the more that I've been it's given me a look into how we learn language where rather
than learning five bazillion adjectives I go I understand what an adjective is and of course
we are all read into some degree of vocabulary. I understand what an adverb does and I understand
what an adverb is. I know what a noun is. I know what the component parts of a sentence are. I know
what you know I guess a clause, a contraction, any of these things and it allows you to be
interesting and artistic with your language to the extent that you can but I can't like I can
speak a degree of Spanish but I'm not even slightly artistic in Spanish. I would be something. I
speak like a child with a head injury and anyway the basic understanding of the English language
allows you to then be a student of Spanish. 100% but I'm limited by my experience. I'm limited by
my understanding of techniques. I'm limited by my understanding almost like let's say techniques
are like vocabulary. So even if I kind of sort of grasp the sentence structure and the thought
process and the thought patterns of Spanish which it's interesting because just even the
orientation and the organization of a language and I've thought about this a great deal,
you know the way that I perceive the world is affected deeply by the language that I learned.
Do you know the again if I learned I have no idea how the Chinese language structures
but I can only imagine that it would be that it would affect it's like a different lens. We're
looking at the same thing but I have a different set of sunglasses on than you do and that's very
very interesting. I'll use the Quran as an example. You know apparently it's unbelievably poetic
and in Arabic still neat and was interesting reading in English but I'm told by people that I
trust that it just one doesn't bear resemblance to the other and I think that's a very interesting
thing that you may be able to say the same thing but in a more I guess in a different way in a
more artistic way that that may not translate on a one for one kind of fidelity but the more
that we're able to understand about how the body works the more examples of the body working this
way the body working that way the body working that way the more that I'm able to eventually
become an artist but it has to be studied as a science first and it does start with technique
collection vocabulary collection the same way we learn in school where you remember how to say
quickly 17 different ways and let's say I speak Spanish I'm only I only know three so you might use
quickly you might use an adjective like quickly in Spanish but use one of the many many options
to describe that that I don't understand and now I sit there and go like wait what I can't be artistic
I can't be as organic with the languages I like so I believe that jujitsu a lot of times starts
with the acquisition of a lot of hey do this this this drill this technique here's an Americana
Americana to an arm lock arm lock to a triangle but the problem with that is oftentimes we get
stuck in that phase and I people eventually become move collectors or sequence collectors and I
noticed this when I'm trying to do dbd or I guess like an instructional series now or even teaching
in class I don't believe in that form of learning anymore not that it's not valuable but I don't
believe I don't understand jujitsu on that level anymore so what I'm trying to do is get across
the basic ideas to people and say hey you need to fill in the gaps with going to class all the time
you need to go hey learn this move learn that technique learn that technique because otherwise
I'm basically just throwing at you like 75 different words that you could use but that
hasn't really taught you how to how to speak a language whereas if you give me the language
structure you can fill in these pieces on your own and then eventually speak organically in
lex form which will be ultimately unique to you because otherwise you just end up being like a
weird facsimile of whatever it is that I'm doing for mostly the worst I'd say but uh yeah that's
what people I mean people comment like is this especially people haven't listened to me before
is this guy drunk or high does he does does MIT really allow slow people to uh to be like what's
quote is it like what's what's wrong with him is he getting sleep are you okay and does he need help
so that that's similar with my jiu jitsu is like is this guy is this guy really whatever rank I was
throughout I remember just like is this guy really this rank I just have a very kind of certain way
of sitting and being slow and lazy looking that there was ultimately the language that I had to
discover and it was uh it was yeah it was a very liberating moment I think of probably a few years
of getting my ass kicked especially with open guard and butterfly to where you really allow yourself
to take in the entirety of the language and realize that um that I'm not I'm different I'm a unique
I'm unique and like I have a very um I have a language I have a set of techniques a way I move
my body that needs that I'm the one to discover like it's you can only you can learn specific
techniques and so on but you really have to understand your own body and that's the beautiful
thing about jiu jitsu like you said is like the the connection about your philosophy your view of
the world with the physical and like connecting those two things how you perceive the world how
you interpret ideas of the world about exhaustion about force about effortlessness like what it
really means to relax all these kinds of loose concepts and then actually teach your body to
like do those things and like you know and be able to apply force and spurts be able to relax
and spurts and like figure all that stuff out for my for your my individual body but it's as you
mentioned that's I couldn't agree with you more it's a discovery process and no one can cheat that
process which is at the same time it's almost imagine I want to start writing books in second
grade unless maybe I'm like staggeringly brilliant like which I can only conceptualize someone being
able to do that but maybe a moat start of the English language where you're out there doing it
but for most of us we don't have enough knowledge enough information enough experience to be able to
be to express ourselves so we have to basically input repeat which is important but it's the
process as you say of going through that of getting your ass kicked to just like well that
didn't work well that didn't work that felt right but I don't know nobody else does that I guess I
don't believe in that versus eventually going I don't know I'll just try going my own way and
see what happens and now I'll get yelled at and people won't like me and if it works they'll
say I got lucky and if it doesn't work they'll say I was dumb but which one maybe all is right but
basically you know going through that iterative process that allows you to eventually find yourself
expression and find your voice so that you you fight the same way that you speak the same way
that you write the same way that you think in a way that that is uniquely you that will also
ultimately allow you to understand other people being uniquely them because even if you can only
conceptualize and I think about this a lot for society stuff where I go well this is how I feel
about this but am I objectively right maybe about a couple things but that's a small box
that I have to be very very careful about what I think is objective versus what's not and I have
to be open to the possibility of all the things that I think are objectively correct may or may
not be and that should allow me to have some degree of compassion or consideration for other people
both in their martial arts journey and in their journey you know as people as human beings because
I understand that they're on a it's a we're all on a path where it's all in again an iterative process
of eventual self expression but I think that's one of the things that we see having trouble when we
see tribalism which I mean racism expression of that political affiliation to expression of that
all of these things that can go in really uncomfortable directions people are looking for
hey where do I plant my feet over here where's where's the thing that I know is right and
that we can all agree on the following and I think that we see that in martial arts we're like oh I
do this style why do that style I do that stuff it's like hey man we're all just pushing forward
in a certain direction here trying to do our best and I understand why you feel the way you do I may
have felt like that at one point too but uh you know we're I'm just trying to learn and understand
versus I've already acquired enough knowledge let me cross my arms and start to to look who's
fucking up around here and and I think that uh that's an it's an interesting trap that I think
it's very human trap to fall into but it definitely happens early on it's I mean it's a joke in the
jujitsu world right like on the blue belt that that knows everything well initially it's like what I
know nothing and I at least think I know nothing then I'd learn a little bit and I think it's a
lot bit and then you know the more you learn the more you go like I don't even know what I'm doing
yeah that's exactly right we kind of talked about it a little bit but uh once again a lot of people
that listen to this have never been on the mat have never tried jujitsu but are really curious
about it everybody at all positions like uh I think you know mosques kids are not doing jujitsu
Andrew Yang is like they're all you know the world is curious it's uh it's a nice it seems to be
a nice methodology by which to humble your ego which to grow intellectually and physically so
people are curious about it so the natural question is if they're curious about it
how would you recommend they get started maybe like what do you recommend the first day week
month year first couple years look like like how do you ease into it and make sure that it's
a positive experience and you progress in the most optimal and positive way the first thing you can do
is is simply ask yourself why why you want to be involved and you know I remember the first day
that I walked into ronin athletics in uh in new york city to train under my godfather my son now
christian montes um and I didn't know what I was getting myself into I played baseball through
high school and I wanted I was at Manhattan college um in the Bronx and I wanted to go
and learn martial arts because it was always something that was interesting to me but it was
never something that that was I that I knew was accessible and it definitely wasn't really around
in northern virginia where I grew up whereas then you stick yourself in in Manhattan and there's
stuff everywhere so anyway I guess I didn't know what to expect um I didn't know if I was
going to get beat up if people were going to be nice if people were not going to be nice um but
what I began with was I think expectation management and I think that that's something
that uh I would that'd be the first thing that I would start is almost imagining what is it that
I'm getting myself into because I love the martial arts with with the martial arts has given me
everything in life and I'm so thankful I wouldn't be sitting here um without without that that
experience of the journey of the people that I've met the place that I got I could never ever have
ever imagined um and I'm just unbelievably thankful for that but I think that the thing that
um that helped me most of all was starting with going you know my mom said something to me one
time and she said uh you know there's two types of people in various situations there's why and
there's why not and you know it's understandable to have questions concerns things like that um
but and maybe sometimes it's a little bit easier when you're when you're younger to just trust
people or just say I don't know you know um but uh we go hey you want to climb that rock I'm like
yeah why not let's go hey you want to jump in that river yeah why not sure versus if I have to reason
my way into everything I have I have to be talked into everything a lot of times I'll talk myself
out of it and I think that a lot of times this is the thinkers disease um you want to figure out
what's going to happen and what you should expect to have happen before you get involved versus going
using the old Bruce Lee saying again it's like no amount of thinking or training on the on the
side of the river will teach you how to swim you have to jump in and there are risks associated
with that and so uh I guess uh psychological are usually the biggest ones that's the biggest hurdle
and physical um but the biggest thing that I guess I would suggest anyone to say why do you
want to do this you're like well I want to challenge myself I want to learn I would like to learn to
fight I want to learn to fight so that I could protect myself and if and if anything else other
people if only when the norms reach I perceive that if I had some small degree of power um I
generally wouldn't use it which is why I was like yeah I'll give it a try I'll try to be reasonable
and hopefully if I make a mistake I'll apologize to people but basically uh I said yeah I'd like
to have that and I want to I know this is gonna be challenging and we'll see what happens and that
means that getting beat up and I didn't get like hurt but getting roughed up getting my arm bent
this way or that way getting choked I was like well this is all supposed to happen that's no big
deal it would be like going and joining the army during peacetime and then going oh I'm just doing
this for a college education you're like okay that's cool man and then all of a sudden war breaks
out and they want to send me somewhere and I'm like whoa whoa whoa whoa I didn't sign up for that
kick actually you did whether you realize it or not you may not have thought that you did
but you did so getting your mind right and and just going what are my expectations this activity
what is it that I'm looking to do and of course you know you're you're going into a gym you're
going into a place that you don't know people or you probably don't know people and you don't know
the coach and even if you do want to hey how you do and shake your hand type of level you know 95%
of my students don't know me not really you know I'll try to be polite and not annoy them too much
but they don't know me and I don't know them I understand if they don't trust me I wouldn't
trust trust me either if I were them but at the same time someone has to take that leap and one
of the things that I've noticed as a martial arts instructor that's the biggest struggle
with dealing with adults which is why a lot of people like to teach kids is kids kids don't ask
don't argue now that also means there's there's all sorts of pitfalls or that sort of thing and
that can be an issue but you know I guess a lot of times people get to a point in their life you
know in their 20s early 30s where now I'm a manager now I know what I'm doing no one talks to me
like that versus like hey man you go join boot camp I don't care if you are Elon Musk they're going
to shut up and do push ups and that's what's great about it so you are taking a leap of faith
into a world that you're going to be a tiny fish and you got to hope that the people who are who
are guiding you in that in that journey are going to have I can't say even say your best
interest at heart because they don't even know you but they'll they'll try to do no harm and
they'll try to help you in the way that they would understand and I guess that's for instance that's
what I would try to do with anyone that that comes into my gym I would try to help them in the way
that I understand they need as best I can and as safe and reasonable a way as possible but sometimes
in a way that's going to make them uncomfortable particularly if physical combat and and it's
not something they've done before if they've a lot of people go in without even having played
you know contact sports and so that can be a big jump and you have to understand if that's where
you're starting from no worries but you're going to have to kind of work your way to it and it's
going to be uncomfortable and and it'll and that's okay it's part of the process and you're going to
have some bumps and bruises and you're not going to want to roll with that guy in the corner because
that that person's rough and they beat you up and they're like okay but is this a big hurt or is it
a little hurt if it's a big hurt okay if it's a little hurt I need you to draw up a little bit
yeah it's such an interesting balance because to find I think one of the most important things
as in anything I think in life is the selection of the people that you put around you I mean
that's true with like getting married that's true with like if you go to if people ask me like
graduate students like your PhD advisor can can be the difference it's everything it's like you
spend five years with somebody they're going to basically define the more impact on you than
anybody you marry anybody you hang out with is a huge impact and the same with the the coach
selection which is like the school selection is it's going to be really important about in terms
of like who you select will define how happy like the trajectory of your growth and how happy you
are with the entirety of the experience and yet like the the flip side of that is especially if
you have an ego especially if you are the manager then you still let go some stuff you're going to
feel like shit with the good with the best kind of coach that's that's what you need right but
there's in the night there's a weird balance there to find like I mean like and everybody
needs a different thing like I'm much more I enjoy being sort of like sounds weird but like
I'm you know from the wrestling background I enjoy feeling like crap in a sense like the coach
like getting beat up I don't actually enjoy it it's not like some masochistic thing or whatever
it's the growth like I like the anxiety I like feeling like like shit when I go home like
emotionally physically it's a growth it's like it's growth it's a sign of growth right like
if you're not having to feel those things you're probably in your comfort zone which is fine but
that's not your growth zone right and everybody has a different threshold for that I mean the
beautiful thing about jiu jitsu is like it's also has like a yoga feel to it like you're
learning about your body so depending on the gym and depending on in fact the coaches the people
around you within the gym you can select little groups too kind of like the people with who you
roll like if you're a smaller person it doesn't mean you have to go against big people you can go
against the people who like smoke a lot of weed and they're chill or you can go against like that
crazy ripped blue belt competitor who's like out to destroy everybody and depending on like
what your mindset is you can kind of select that it's such a fascinating journey of like
basically self discovery I couldn't agree with you more it's and what you need may change over
time right you maybe what you needed what you need today could change six months from now or
a year from now and that's something that I experience I'll use my my first coach Christian
again as a great example of someone who I really look up to and respect and someone who helped me
a lot like at a time when I really needed some guidance and I needed to learn martial arts but
get into I the Hensel Gracie's gym was right down the street from where Christian was teaching
and Christian was a blue belt at the time it was he was teaching at a place called fight house which
was this awesome like you know like 90s early 2000s you know warehouse area down on fashion avenue
in Manhattan off of like between 7th and 8th and it was like like two basketball courts wide but
like there's the sombo guys over here there was the collie guys over there there was a wing chun
over there was Jiu Jitsu in the corner and Hensel's was one of the most famous academies in the world
at that time still is and I just didn't know what Hensel Gracie was and I mean it's a great gym
and it's a fantastic place for people to train but I think what was right for me at the time was to
I stumbled into you know like a two person elevator up and found a place where six people
trained at that time and I had someone that that I could that could give me some like in addition
to martial arts advice like personal guidance and that made a that made a big difference and then
when initially we would have like competitions or like intra intra you know gym competitions with
the sombo guys we would compete we would roll with them and like again it was great because they were
just a bunch of like like Russian dudes from like Brighton Beach and they would come down
and then we would all fight and then everyone would train and we'd all drink tea and then go home
and anyway what was Russian it was super super tough and they were like again just a tough group
of people it was great and then I remember when I decided after like four or five months my men
I really want to try to take this seriously and I told Christian about that and he's like well hey
I think you need to do the following and it was you know like hey here's there was a guy named
Jeff Ruth who was a purple belt at the time which was a much bigger deal than there's now but was
10 and 0 as an MMA fighter a lot of amateur box spirit super tough dude and Jeff was the was the
best person at that time that I'd ever trained with and I just got squashed Christian used to beat
me up too but like Jeff would just absolutely kick the crap out of me and I was like this is awesome
and this was back when I was at home I went home for the summer for that and Chris was like hey I
think you should stay because I told him that's what I was thinking and this was a coach that
you know when it's like when initially was exactly what I needed and then he's like well hey that's
not what I'm doing here maybe they're going to be able to help you onto a path that's that's kind
of commensurate with what your goals are at the moment and then you know that was an that was an
interesting thing and I really got I feel that I was fortunate to start um at a place where my
coach was able to transition role and and and do so comfortably and I think that that also was
probably a factor the fact that you know where he'd done some of his training prior like there
have been issues with with the coach there we're like not supporting not having the support you
know feeling like hey like I'm going to hold on to my students I'm going to hold on to my best
guy or my best girl even if I can't take them where they need to go um so that was an interesting
thing and just recognizing also though that the people like the same way you're an individual
going into a gym and you don't know what you're getting into your coach is a person too and and
he or she you know they may have been doing this activity longer than you but they're not they're
not some weird little you know all knowing god they don't know anything they're gonna they may
say something that pisses you off they may bum they may yell at you they may help you they may
inadvertently cause you some sort of you know some sort of issue and just being able to recognize
that even though I say this to people and I've said this to people in my gym I'm like
you know we're in the service industry man but I'm not at your service like don't get it twisted
like I will absolutely do my best to help people I'm there to do my best as a martial arts coach
but I'm here to do my best as a martial arts coach and I'll do my best and periodically I make
mistakes and I own apology or two and I'll try to give them out when I can but we're not McDonald's
it's not oh you gave me a hundred bucks so you do whatever you want in here this is my house this is
my gym this is my dojo this is this is a martial arts this is not a basketball team yeah there's
something beautiful about martial arts like exactly as you said is the coach like in wrestling and at
least collegiate like high level wrestling is like there's a dictatorship aspect to a coach
that is very important to have like this this ridiculous sometimes nature of like master
and so on and bowing all these traditions there's something it seems ridiculous from the outside
perhaps but there's something really powerful to that because that process of you said why not of
letting go of the leap of faith requires you to believe that the coach has your best interest
in mind and just give yourself over to their ideas of how how you should grow and that's an
interesting thing I mean I've never been able to really see coaches I've had as human they're always
you always it's like a father figure or like this you always put them in this position of power and
I think that's I think at least for me it's been a very it's been a very useful way to see the
coach because it allows you to not think and let go and really allow yourself to grow and
emotionally deal with all the beatings they'll push you were passed oftentimes where you would
have stopped yourself right which is great and then hopefully they know they if they're paying
attention and they're they're still a person they can make mistakes but they'll push you
further than you would have gone but not so far that it's not facilitative right right that's
something that I can say like for us a hobby the head coach at tri star what my head coach for
MMA Kenny Florian one of the head coaches for MMA have both been phenomenal influences Paul Schreiner
who's the one of the assistants at Marcelo Garcia's Academy coached me in jiu jitsu for a long time
brilliant instructor they've all been able to do that and I think what's interesting about all of
those guys they're very sharp but they they're very intuitive as well and I think that for us
actually you know told me about some of the John Wooden said John Wooden the legendary UCLA basketball
coach just a simple philosophical idea just he said some people's life is a bowl of shit it needs
some whipped cream in it some people's life is a bowl of whipped cream needs a little bit of
shit in it just to balance it out and it's an interesting thing coaching everyone the same way
doesn't work you know that's I think the difference between a coach and an instructor and a lot of
times people think they want to coach but they really want an instructor I'm like hey like tell
me what to do not how to do it and then other times people think they want you know an instructor
and they really want to coach and I'm like man this guy's just giving me information a coach is
so much more than an instructor and that's a huge leap and that's something that I think that people
need to understand when they're going into martial arts and I understand I can totally grasp why
they don't because how would they know but uh I think about this a lot like me giving you $150
for a month which is not nothing that's for sure that does not that pays for instructor really
coach is a relationship that gets developed because can you imagine like just the amount of
emotional investment and time thinking away from from like oh Alex isn't here anymore what can I
do to help him what does he need like that's that's serious and that's the difference between
that's that's often times the difference that getting getting over the hump in various situations
so it's uh it's an interesting you know bargain that's being made like commitment by the by the
instructor who becomes a coach commitment by the student you know like there's a financial
transaction there's a lot of things going on there but I feel very fortunate to have had
not just instructors in my time but coaches and that means sometimes we butted heads and
sometimes I look back and I think I was right and other times look back in my own no they were
definitely right but there was always the trust with the exception of one time that I feel that
trust was greatly betrayed that rightly or wrongly whether mistakes mistakes will be made but
everyone is attempting to do do the right thing under no circumstances would I intentionally
do anything malicious you know versus hey I might have done I might have burnt your house down but
you can be darn sure it wasn't on purpose and I think that as long as there's that mutual understanding
and mutual belief of goodwill which again doesn't just magic up out of nowhere I understand I think
that that's when then great things can happen and I look at all the athletes that I know you know
the guys and girls that I've watched become fantastic in various places almost invariably
they it never happened alone yeah yeah I'm really torn about that like um maybe you can help have
you seen the movie whiplash so it's uh I would say from an outsider's perspective people should
watch it's a I guess jazz band of it's a movie about a drummer and the instructor and he it's
a basically I would say from the outsider's perspective it's a toxic relationship but he's
really the coach whatever we call him pushes the the musician the drummer to his limits like to where
he just feels like shit emotionally it's it it looks like a toxic relationship but it's one
that ultimately is very productive for the improvement of the musician I have the same
like in my own experience I had um I got a chance to train at a couple places regularly and so one
of my coaches uh who is a great human being a lot of people love him but when I was a blue belt he
was pushing me a lot for competition and every time I stepped on the mat I was uh uh anxious and
almost afraid of training because of like the places I'm gonna have to go and then the I can't
I don't know what's good or bad because I think I've become a better person because of that experience
like I needed that and on the flip side like the place I got my black belt from balance studios
I remember also a blue belt uh the coach sitting down and I was going to competition and he saw
something in me where he said um you know like good luck but win or lose we always love you
like I I really I remember that because I really needed that at that time like I was putting so
much pressure on myself like I'm not an actual professional competitor you know I just competed
like I'm a PhD student like but like it was clearly having a psychological effect on me
and that's what a great coach does is like you know it's like life is more important than jujitsu
since it's bigger so they find you use jujitsu when you need it to grow as a person
and when it overwhelms you you you have to pull that person out like look at the bigger picture
always look at the bigger picture it's fascinating and I don't know what to make of it I don't think
I would have it any other way is both the anxiety and the and the love yeah I think that I couldn't
that's a really interesting thing that you're describing that I guess it kind of brings me back
to a lot of the other things we've been discussing is just almost like the the reciprocal nature
of everything where no pressure that's great everyone's happy all the time it's even I mean
let's uh use an example of sci fi movies to say The Matrix which of course the first one was amazing
and then each subsequent movie made this series worse but um but basically they're working on a
new one by the way yeah I've heard we'll see I'm hoping for the best but um but basically uh you
know let's say hey we started our first initial world agent Smith says to Neo he's like our first
world was a utopia where everyone was happy and nothing ever went wrong it's like your primitive
cerebrum rejected it and I think that there's obviously I mean what do I think but I guess
well I'm here so I might as well say what I think um but I guess uh you know great things are fantastic
a kind gentle place is fantastic and this is again why I love Dune because I think Dune does
such a great job of of expressing Frank Herbert does such a great job of expressing again the
reciprocal nature of these ideas you know look at uh look at Sparta for instance or at least what I
understand is Sparta from the reading and also watching 300 um uh you know and reading the Wikipedia
and reading the Wikipedia article about the movie not the uh place um but uh it's um that's a hard
brutal place and there was their benefit to that like absolutely was their drawback to that
absolutely is it sustainable I should I would think probably not um I mean granted it hasn't
sustained but I mean that type of a of a thing it burns too hot almost and it uh it destroys the
host at a certain point and you know I guess that that type of unforgiving nature but entirely
entirely permissive has its own issues and I guess coming back to your what your description
of like describing a toxic relationship is a very dangerous and tricky thing because it's almost
like uh it's like birds eye view me it's like you know you see let's say a husband and a wife arguing
and you're like all right well sort of somebody hitting somebody I need to keep myself out of this
because I have no idea what I'm seeing something but I don't know what's going on or why specifically
and again short of it going to a place that's that just out a lot of bounce I don't know who's
right here I don't know who's wrong and I don't know what phase of this things are in so I guess
coming back and in the long term what's good for yeah the both people right it's dangerous for so
if I want to put my finger on the scale I can understand the the desire to do them like hey
guys just break it up yeah but and that may be the right thing at the time but at the same time
I'm not sure so I think back to all of the times that you know that like you mentioned your coach's
pushing you when very very hard and then other times going like hey let's put it in perspective
here I think that's an interesting thing for high performance and I think that we're seeing that
again societally you know now or at least maybe that's just pops up on my internet feed periodically
but coaches shouldn't be allowed to do this or yell at this person to yell at that person
like well have you ever been go to boxing gym it's not a commercial entity not really a real
boxing not LA boxing not a USC gym like a real place you're going to see what things are like
when it's entirely performance based go to wrestling room at a high level you know again
there's there's left and right limits and there are such things obviously is abuse of course
but and that should never be tolerated um but it's not a commercial entity I don't need to be sweet
to you if you're if you're screwing up if you're dropping the ball and in fact recognizing that
I'm not doing you a favor or the team a favor by by being permissive of that type of behavior
I think is important everything in its context and at its time is important and I guess I can
think again at the times that I've been put put or had put on me like a great deal of pressure
to do x y's a year to succeed um or to push for success and I can't look back fondly enough on
those times and they were tough at the time but without that I'm not sitting here without that
I don't go from growing up in a in a very nice family in the suburbs to fighting at the highest
level in jujitsu gi no gi and now in mixed martial arts starting a career at age 27
you know I don't it just doesn't happen because people generally speaking from that
background don't get pushed hard enough physically to be able to make that transition
and that has benefits and it has drawbacks you know when you stare into the abyss it stares
back and I think that that's an important thing to understand you know you stare long enough you
you can become something that you don't that you would be sorry that you did you don't look
enough and you don't have perspective either you know and I think that that's an interesting thing
I can speak to someone who's relative to being someone who's relatively articulate and reasonable
I try to be reasonable but you know I'll say in sparring if people get crazy with me they get a
warning and then I'ma crack them and what do they expect oh they hear the guy on a on an interview
but who did they think they were meeting because there's also the guy in the ring
and there's layers there too I remember training with you it was it's kind of funny
there's like there's well you didn't know who I was I mean you still like I have a really good
straight ankle up by the way yeah that so I don't remember what rank I was but it might have been
purple or something like that and I did some like I you had this look on your face which I've
often seen in black belts it's like here he goes again like here here's him trying this thing
and then when I kind of annoyed you a little bit with it now I get that it was a good it like I
you know I did something somewhat effective like some like maybe a little bit off balance
yeah there's I just peeled off a little layer of Ryan Hall to where I was like okay let me
let me like there there's like layers underneath there's like my Tyson's somewhere in there
like so it was like okay this like new guy rolls in here he thinks he can do the stupid thing
and then and then you started to beat the hell out of me but the the point is there's layers here
from the guy who was being interviewed now to like Genghis Khan but it's but it's all in the same
body right but it's like all of us are like that right in various different directions and recognizing
that's okay it's just there are consequences to all every choice that we make has a consequence
sometimes there's like objectively wrong or objectively right but at least in my mind that's
a pretty small box everything else is just there's a consequence to that do you like that consequence
do you not and who do I want to become what do I want to try to hone myself for anyone else into
and also like but this is something I've screwed up as a coach plenty of times you know like if
someone says if you're if like I come to like Lex I really really want to take you know research
very seriously like okay I believe you now I haven't shown you that but I believe you like okay
and now me not showing up to research or to study or not being up until three in the morning thinking
about this is no longer acceptable there was a time like five seconds before me making that statement
that if I went to bed without reading the book that I needed to read no worries but the second
that I made that statement your expectations for me changed and maybe it's something that's
something that I've screwed up a whole bunch of times in my as a teacher because it's an
interesting thing obviously you know being a like running a martial arts school is as your
principally an athlete is sometimes I don't pay enough attention to what people are doing I would
just go okay you say XYZ I'm like Roger that I believe you're cool I will now put you in category
X and whether rightly or wrongly like maybe this person didn't understand what they were asking
for or I didn't express this or the other and it just it caused cross wires and then most
times you just you hash it out you have a discussion you figure out get to the bottom of
what people are trying to do or what they want but uh if I was paying more attention I think I
could have been a lot more effective or if I had more experience and sometimes maybe I'm not sharp
enough or I don't I'm not perceptive enough to be able to to see what's going on and maybe with
years more down the line I'll be able to have a sharper perception but uh I think that's another
one of those interesting things that some that sometimes I would caution or not caution but
just inform a prospective martial arts student depending upon where you're going um you know
this you both you and also your coach or other people in the room they wear many hats and sometimes
there's a I had the wrong hat on you were talking to me as Lex the guy I didn't realize you were
talking to me I thought you were talking to me as Lex the guy I didn't realize you're talking to me
as Lex the martial artist I'm like oh crap I was talking to the wrong person so it's almost like if
you had a like I run my gym with my wife she's a black belt so she's my wife she's my peers as a
martial artist uh in jiu jitsu he's here by the way in judging so exactly all right well all right
so but but a fellow black belt and I guess like another she doesn't have a microphone so you can't
hear all the trash she's talking exactly but it can be tough and that's something we've had to work
through a lot and it's like looking back and it's like now being where I'm at now and it's easy for
me to say that because she's in the room and I don't want to stab me just continue to slowly
poison me over time yeah um which frankly I understand um you know it's it's the sort of thing
that that is now way more effective than anything else I could really reasonably expect to have
but there were times when when both of us you know were justifiably annoyed at the other because
of crossed wires and sometimes you know you just have disagreement anywhere or misunderstanding
anyway but again like I've I coach some of my friends I've coached I've coached my friend who
I've known since I was four years old you know sometimes I don't go hey buddy how you doing
sometimes like what the fuck are you doing put your hand over there how many times we talked
about this and then you walk away and you can see him look at your crooked and you're like oh
crap oh yeah he thought I was talking to his friend yeah well all right let we need to talk this one
out hashing out and not he's wrong how could he possibly think that way like oh no I totally
understand that but if I was 22 but doesn't need no I'm a purple belt some nonsense like that and
it's and it doesn't come from a bad place but it's just I guess that comes back to society to anything
people only have the perspective that they have and the awareness that we have and so again going
back and going hey guys grace like I don't expect it's not fair for me to go I'd fight UFC why
doesn't this guy who came in as an attorney understand how hardcore this needs to be and
like how could he and at the same time though if if I'm using the language of someone that is
interested in at least performance from a martial arts perspective I understand how that could be
off putting let's say for instance someone that's like all of that would be out of bounds in their
normal workplace but if they think of the gym as my office then whether they agree or disagree with
what's going on they go okay I hear why I see why that might have happened let's talk about this
and we can again all push forward in a positive direction that benefits I guess everyone's journey
throughout the activity and now on top of all that there's moods okay I mean especially lately
uh I think two days ago maybe yesterday no two days ago I've never been that cranky in my life
I think I don't know what it was but I wanted to tell everybody how much they annoyed me
it was like I was just very conscious of this feeling of like why why is this happening right
now so I consciously decided as I usually do in those cases to not say anything to anybody
how do you do that uh well I you know it's uh it's yeah meditate because it's not I tend to
to I tend to then visualize what's going to happen in the next like how's this going to make my life
better like if I say something that mean to somebody else I have uh just started a conflict
that will just escalate will continue will add more conflict to my life it'll make things I just
don't like the feeling it will create and so you live enough life to know that like uh it's just like
with like street fighting you know I I would get into a lot of fights when I was younger just on
the street but then you realize like it's not like a jiu jitsu match or something like that it's not
it'll escalate it'll it'll might come back at you it'll like that person might find you again but
more importantly the anxiety of it of having created little enemies in this world distorts the
way you see the world so I've noticed that like if I am shitty to people on the internet which I
haven't been I think in a long time is like it it somehow brings the shittiness to you more and more
it escalates like the more love you put out there the more like the people who put love out like
surround you when you mentioned forgiveness as well like you said you give hope it's like I
guess back to the original you know the holocaust survivor scenario we're like oh my god like you
think of the ultimate in like I've never experienced one one billionth of that level of of pain and
horror and it's like and I can't let this little thing go you know I guess that's an interesting
thing I think you're just making the point in your personal life I guess the same way right
yeah they're yeah and on the internet it's hard I've somehow gotten I mean you've you've had a
level of celebrity for a while I've recently gotten some level of like celebrity and like these
people who are just shitty for no reason come out from all from all places like calling me a
fraud or anything else I mean it's a giant silent bob strike back they find out a movie is going to
be made about them and people talking shit on the internet and they're like what's the internet and
then someone shows them and they're like what and they go to a message board and they go to
Hollywood to try to stop it from being made and they eventually get money for their likeness and
they use the money to buy plane tickets and fly around and beat the shit out of all the people
that talk bad about them yeah it's tough I mean it's uh I'm having trouble with it because there's
people like yeah there's you know there's posts and forums and like heated discussions about
his legs for even a fraud I don't know what has he really done and there's like and then there's
people like well I think he's an alright guy but I'm not sure like like there's like literal
discussions and I'm like like nobody like if you increase the level of celebrity there's going to
be like one of the things that hurts my heart a little bit is like some level of toxicity around
Joe Rogan for example there's like communities of people that now like talk about him selling out
for example all that kind of stuff and I don't you know and Joe I've talked to him about it is
amazing that he uh he says don't read the comments he legitimately doesn't read the comments his heart
and his soul doesn't give a damn about the comments all he gives a damn about is his friends like one
of the things that's really inspiring to me and that's I've had a conversation with him offline
about Spotify and the removed episodes people are curious what's Spotify it's it's a thing on the
internet where I think you can play Taylor Swift songs on I'll write that down but you can also
now play Joe Rogan podcast oh cool and they gave him a hundred million dollars so that that's
uh you know that's awesome for Joe it's yeah but the thing I've had a discussion with him
and I made a video about it that I took down because the toxicity is like it's hard to put
into words but he will give away the hundred million in a second if he ever has to compromise
who he is like he doesn't I mean he already said as he talked about he's made quote unquote fuck
you money a long time ago he doesn't need any more money he doesn't care it's nice to have money
whatever but like he'll give it away so the it's nice to see when people like him at a level of
celebrity level of success and financial success don't change at all they're just the same thing
that makes you happy is talking in his case talking shit with his friends in the case of most of us
really just just hanging out with friends doing the things you love in his case doing the things
he loves without any like you know the texas way the freedom like without any corporate bureaucracy
bullshit that rolls in and says well maybe you shouldn't say fuck you know like more than 20
times a podcast or something like that like those kinds like rules like people like he says in a
suit and tie they show up and say stuff oddly enough people that could never have done what he
does yeah exactly and it's kind of inspiring to see that and I hope people I hope people realize
how special of a human he is he's inspired like people like me like I'm just I'm a scientist right
so he inspired somebody like me from a very different walk of life to be like kind to others
to be open minded I don't know that uh it's a special dude so like people need to support that
and treasure that as opposed to uh as opposed to be toxic about it if I mean what uh because people
really for a long time have told me that it would be awesome if Ryan Hall's on goes on Joe Rogan I
definitely think that would be an awesome thing had have you listened to Joe has he been a part of
your life in some kind of way um you know well Joe's always I'm never watching Joe on Fear Factor
when I was a little kid which is cool so I've actually gotten a like from a from a bird's eye
view watch you know his his kind of just path through life yeah but one of the things that that I
always appreciate and again I barely know Joe other than to shake his hand he interviewed me after
the uh briefly in the ring after the BJ Pan fight but um one of the things that I've always admired
about Joe is that I think he had fucking money from the start I think that zero dollars is fucking
money for Joe I think and that's something I respect about him a great deal um because as you
say it's interesting to watch it's like you you hope that uh George St. Pierre's like this it's
really not I'm not super close to George but we're teammates at TriStar and he's never been anything
but a gentleman is one of those people that if you didn't know George was famous when you walk
in the gym you'd never know idea he's not holding court not doing it he's just you know training
and how about an amateur doing this if you have a question for him he'll help me like I'm nobody
man he would give me advice and train me it was super cool and he didn't kill me which I really
appreciated he's a gentleman but uh you know it's like you you meet someone and you go man I'm so
it's so cool that this is the guy who's the best that this is the guy who who's been successful and
then you go why are they successful like I said true to what they're doing they haven't changed
they're the same as they've been and I remember I got to TriStar in 2012 and George was already
already George St. Pierre but I remember watching and talking to people and they're like oh man George
is the same as he's always been and it's neat I see him in the gym training now and again giving
advice now and it seems like Joe has always been consistent and it's neat to watch someone
not compromise on their values and not change who they are and not you know periodically like you
know again we all make mistakes like you have a bad day or this or that and an apology needs to
be issued or even my bad or this or that and you're like yeah they just move on that they're
not afraid to be themselves and they're not afraid to be wrong they're not afraid to make a mistake
as you as you mentioned open mind and some like so what are the correct beliefs to have about this
that I know going in everyone's going to be okay with what I'm saying which is usually the beginning
of a conversation that's going to go nowhere right and it's neat to see the things I guess
that he's created on his own as a result of the authenticity that's there and it reminds me of
like Dave Chappelle and again I've never met Dave but it's neat to see someone that's clearly
again authentic in their own way doing their own thing and they're because of that they're above
the corporate nonsense but what's funny I think the message behind all of it is hey guys we all
are I can't promise you that I'm gonna have money Joe couldn't promise you that he's gonna have money
now it ended up working out but he was above that nonsense from the jump and he just continued
to be above it by never giving it any mind and just going like yeah I'm gonna be a reasonable
person I'm gonna try to learn I'm gonna try to grow and if I say something annoying you can come
and talk to me about it we can get to the bottom of it and I'm like if I need to say my bad thanks
appreciate it now you know I will and if I don't need to I'm like hey I still appreciate the talk
thanks man shake your hand and we carry on and we go our separate ways and hopefully I'll treat
you with respect you treat me with respect and and that's about it and I guess I think it's a
lesson that it can work out no matter what you don't have to count out to like these weird powers
that be and whether you're at this level or at this level but you can live your life the way
that you want and as you mentioned talk to your friends hang out be happy and it just so happens
that that resonates with people it actually reminds me of like speaking at MIT and being in Boston
is like a goodwill hunting you know like again that's what do you really want to do he could
have gone this way he could have gone that way and it was an interesting story but it's like
this person wants to hang out with his buddies and wants to do other things and again happens to
be brilliant and happens to be able to do all these other things but there was I guess it's
like at least in my mind a story of authenticity as well and it was both the same thing in the
Robin Williams character and I just think that that's a message because watch watching things
occur on the internet as they do now things so many things playing out in the public eye
I feel like so many private or otherwise formally private discussions and disputes and you know
interactions now become they all have a well what is this going to say when it goes public
so how can I couch what I'm saying or how can I word this in a way that's going to get people on
my side or use the right buzzwords or not use the wrong buzzwords and it's just neat to see people
you know in their own way flip the bird to that because I just think that that's that's just
not how a human being is meant to think or interact I'm curious what you think about
the thing that recently it has you know me like hosting this podcast I sometimes think about like
who should I talk to and not in terms of like it's the the old Hitler question now Hitler
I would definitely talk to because post world war two because everyone knows he's evil the question
whether you talk to Hitler in 1937 like when people who are really students of what's going on
understand that this is a very dangerous human being but large number of part of the world
they're like well he's a leader who cares for Germany so the question I have it's interesting
to me it involves a particular person named who also lives in Austin Texas named Alex Jones I
don't know if you're familiar with the guy I am familiar with mr. Jones I've actually recently
just listened to info wars like one episode of his show I guess he does every day and it kind of
remind me of a time in college when I drank too much tequila like there's no turning back like
no it's like like the the mistakes you make that like it it's I mean you don't know where you're
going to wake up you don't know who you're going to kill or not kill or steal or rob it's it's
unclear so that that it felt like I was getting pulled into a dark place where pretty much everybody
is a pedophile that's trying to control the world so Bill Gates definitely is a pedophile everybody
in power anybody in power there's a kind of a deep skepticism about power and a conspiratorial way
to see the world where everything is like dark forces in all corners it's like the way you
feel when you're a kid that there's a monster hiding in the closet which is also why you leap
over the bed from like four feet away there's a strategy yes so but he says that you're just
being weak you need to look under the bed under the bed there's monsters and we need to be aware
of them because they're growing they're multiplying you should be and they're touching children
they're touching children exactly so it all connects but the the I when I listened to him
and I thought about like do I want to talk to him on this podcast for example
when I listened to his conversation with Joe Rogan the two times he talked on there to me it was
somehow entertaining like it was fun to listen to it's fun to listen to a madman go on for
four hours because it's almost like theater like this is what I talked to Joe about when people
try to censor Alex Jones Joe says that the people who try to censor him don't give enough credit to
the intelligence of human beings to like understand like that like what a person says on a large
platform does not necessarily is not the truth you can be a madman and say crazy things and
people are intelligent enough to hear certain things when they're said like the earth is flat
they can they can be intelligent enough not to all of a sudden start believing that the earth is
flat like they they're intelligent enough to sort of select different ideas and be able to enjoy
the theater of a particular ridiculous over the top conversation without being sort of influenced
to where they start believing like toxic set of beliefs now there's a lot of sort of other kinds
of people especially now with cancer culture that say well you don't want to give platform to crazy
people that that ultimately whose beliefs might lead to dangerous consequences like and I see it
very often now with conspiracy theories that go that go like way too far like for example
would I I'm not I haven't looked into it so I'm sorry I will look into it but it hurts my heart
to see that on Bill Gates in my opinion the person who has saved and improved more lives than
probably any human in history literally because of the money he's invested in helping like just
just the work he's done on like malaria in Africa the number of people he's helped is huge and yet
every interview anything you see now on Bill Gates everyone is calling him I believe haven't
looked into it but I believe everyone's calling him a pedophile I don't know the full structure of it
but it's it's just a very it feels like an army of like it feels like it's hundreds of thousands
of people that's what it feels like it might be a much smaller percentage but it feels like a huge
number of people are calling him a pedophile so that's the that's the flip side if you allow if
you give platform to conspiracy theories like that then you start to have bigger and bigger
percent of the population believe in these crazy things I just I wanted to put it out there because
I don't know what to think of that if you put yourself in Joe Rogan shoes if you put yourself
in my shoes if you put yourself just in your own shoes I mean I'm even I'm in my shoes right now
great if you're staying your shoes just stay in your shoes can I have your wish would you talk
would you give platform to people like Alex Jones would would you talk to somebody like
Alex Jones or or not yes I would and I feel very strongly about this honestly
well I think that it's it's an interesting thing and I would just say a lot of times I can understand
you know very very clearly why people would take issue with the idea of I guess what they
proceed to be amplifying this man's voice this man's reach you know as a demonstrable negative
but I think you know when you take a step back further the the cure is more damaging than the
disease and significantly so I guess I think that I'm very very wary of I think being where
you mentioned Alex Jones being wary of power and people with it that's a lot of times there's a lot
of truth and validity to crazy things that people say it's the conspiracy theories that stick
are the ones that sound credible at least quasi credible in some aspect and it's almost like
it seems to me like an anchor in people's mind and it is also funny to me obviously the the
Bill Gates it's so funny to tar people with things like pedophile racist rapist like these are
things that we're basically trying to pick words that no one can ever support someone who does these
things yeah and that's you know and that changes year by year like currently pedophile is totally
in as a thing to call somebody just just as a it used to be communist or marxist Cleveland
Browns fan you know like come on you know who actually nobody likes the brown so I'll agree
with you that was that's why I picked on that's the trick is you find a group of people that
nobody likes we're good here all right that's the move but uh yeah that's a creepy thing though
because that is that is the creepy thing it's like people are always looking for groups of
people are always looking for and I find this really deeply disturbing um like hey so who's
the guy that we can all get away with you know just treating like dirt who's the guy that I
can be a dick to I can just walk up and punch in the face and no one's gonna say anything yeah and
it's even if I you know people do that with whether it's literal Nazis or someone that I
called Nazi you know I guess what's the bigger issue this person's ridiculous beliefs or what
I'm doing and you mentioned Hitler before and obviously Mein Kampf being a you know like the
outline for some of the things they did later and when the evil was it always there did it did
it take root later on or flourish later on but was was Adolf Hitler a problem because he had
crazy ideas or because he did things I think it's because it's not I think I know it's because he
did things now if I'm gonna start punishing thought crime I I'm gonna have to start punishing
thought crime and that's a terrifying concept even if I'm right about the certain about the
objectively correct about the things that I decide to call out of bounds who put me in charge and
made me arbiter of good taste and how long until I decide that something else is is out of bounds
it's it's always a sliding scale or it's always a sliding standard and I find that that you know to
be more of a concern than people doing crazy things because I guess if you mention Alex Jones you
know putting out ridiculous ridiculous ideas ridiculous theories I think that most people
don't look at Alex Jones as a credible person now I'm not going to pretend to be deeply read
into all of his beliefs or the things that he's trying to pedal but there's plenty of things
that are quasi mainstream that I think on with this side or that side that maybe not comparably
ridiculous but are yeah you know particularly in hindsight or you know are we're not or silly
and I guess the idea of of getting a group of people together to decide what we're not going
to tolerate is a very very tricky thing and I think that you know it reminds me of law or you know
even you know religion when it gets to like what are the things that we don't like how do we feel
about rape it's like no under no circumstances is that an acceptable behavior murder no that's
not acceptable behavior killing no kind of depends on the situation are you at war were you justified
were you acting in self defense okay so it's not now murder is a specific type of killing
the same way you know other things should be a specific type of something else but I guess we
we draw the line of murder we say if you want to exist in our society you can't do this this
cannot be done and then we go theft if someone said hey I murdered that guy can you understand
where I'm coming from I might say yeah I'll hear you out doesn't mean that I think you're right
but I'm like have you ever been wronged so deeply that you could imagine that you could kill someone
I'm like no I haven't but I could conceptualize someone doing that and I'm like yeah okay and
you still need to go you still need to face you know criminal justice as we have it in our system
at least that's how we've decided yeah there's it's interesting you have to be able to like
there's if you look at the history of discourse in this country I think it's still true but I'm
not sure it's changed since 9 11 is it used to be impossible to criticize a soldier it was easier
to criticize war it was harder to criticize soldiers for allowing themselves to be the tools of war
I tend to be maybe it's the Russian upbringing it's the it's the combat thing I tend to romanticize
war and soldiers I see soldiers as heroes but I've also heard people that not only say that
soldiers are the war is bad they say soldiers are bad what's their argument it's it's the kind of a
libertarian view that they're basically slaves to evil right war is evil and they're they're given
they are suspending their moral and ethical like as like duties as a human being to become the
tools of evil that's sort of the argument if you see war is evil I mean I think it's useful to hear
that but there's for a long part in history that was completely unacceptable same with abortion
you see abortion as murder I mean if I classified in that if I put it in that in that basket
it starts we're living in the midst of like a genocide looked at from that perspective
could you feel how people could be deeply upset by abortion you go of course looked at from a
different perspective you say I don't believe it to be murder that's not how I see it then you go
oh well if that's the genesis of your your thought process then you're like yeah okay now now I see
how we can come to a different thing but I guess we go well abortion is murder period therefore if
you support it you support murder that's a convenient way for me to tar you right but I guess
that's kind of coming back to the alex jones I'm this nuance it's uh you have to have the nuance
in these kinds of conversations and I have to be willing to have the conversation and I have to
be willing to sit down if I can't sit down across from like the most violently racist angry hypothetical
internet you know conceived person that none of us have ever actually met in real life but or hopefully
not um you know and go like well of course I believe that this person's wrong but allow me to
change do my best I'll hear him out and I'll go no I can go point by point explain where this guy
or this girl is wrong and hopefully bring them over to a more reasonable position where they will
have better beliefs and they will like objectively better beliefs and beliefs that will will and they'll
treat other people better why would I want to marginalize this person I might not want to talk
I might not want to invite them to my barbecue if they're acting like a jerk all the time but
how could I would it not make the world a better place if I'd hear them out and they go look if
you're gonna sit down and talk with me we're gonna have to have a discussion I'll hear what you have
to say and if I can't if I can't explain to someone why their ridiculous belief is wrong
then I might I must not be so confident in my position and I guess that's where I come back
to the Alex Jones thing as you mentioned you know with uh with Bill Gates and and you're much
more familiar with with the specifics of all the good that he's done but you know again he's been
an unbelievable force for good you know in this world you can list a b c d things that the man
has has done this foundation has done and you know positive things and then the other people
could speculate about ridiculous crazy levels of of evil but you can't produce any evidence for
that sort of thing because if you could the man will find himself in trouble you know and anyway
I guess what I would would say is that why you can't force me to accept the truth the same way
you could write down two plus two equals four on a piece of paper and show me how it works and I
could say nah but that doesn't make it not true and you've still given yourself an opportunity
to present your case you've presented it to me and you've also for anyone listening and watching
you know you've been able to critically assess what's gone on you know or critically address
back and forth you know kind of the the discourse and I think that you almost you're making your
case for the public so I guess like you know when it comes to just never not engaging with
these people that seems to me to be cowardly and I think that that's a something that we're seeing
in society right now I think I think we're seeing a crisis of courage in society all over the place
and I think that's where we're seeing poor leadership I think we're seeing you know
understandable things happening everywhere but we need stronger voices and stronger
stronger beliefs that have a conviction and are willing to engage with others
not just turning into a shouting contest and not I didn't win because there's more of me oh I voted
I out voted you that's nice too but that's a stand in for bullets that's saying I won because
there's more of me that doesn't mean that I'm right because plenty of horrible and unpopular
now things have been very very deeply popular in the past and would have won a popular vote
does that make them right I'd say clearly not so I guess you'd hope that we engage with these people
and that you can do your best to bring them over to a more reasonable position if you believe that
you have one and if you can't well at least you made the effort and I think that that's
something where martial arts shows the value it's like do you know if you're going to go
win your next fight I'm like I have no idea I will proceed forward with with full effort and
and you know I will fight with dignity I'll fight with honor and I'll fight with courage
and I'll use everything that I have and I will play within the bounds of the game and that's that
and the result will be what it'll be but I'll walk into and out of that ring with my head
hell high because I will know that I did my part I did my job the outcome the specific outcome is
not in my control it's just strongly in my influence and and I think that that's something
that helped me that martial arts has taught me because other times even when I was successful
or unsuccessful I would focus on if I won I'm I won therefore I'm good I lost therefore I'm bad
this other guy won or lost therefore as opposed to evaluating their method and I think it's so easy
when we're taking a bird's eye view of things to not evaluate how someone's doing things you're not
evaluating my process you're simply evaluating my outcome and I could have stumbled into something
very very good or very very bad and we can look back and I think that's the value of history I mean
I don't mean to get on my dang high horse but it's like this evaluate histories we can see the
unbroken chain or the chain of events that led us somewhere and then only with only with the eyes
of history can we truly evaluate things unless we're in the room watching it happen and I guess
that's again where we start to go most of the big bad scary things that have happened in history
that are done particularly on an industrial scale which implies governmental power and
things like that or these the equivalent involve groups of people getting together and going hey
we're not going to deal with that guy giant groups of people so maybe we're right this time
but maybe we're wrong next time and I guess I would be back to the Gandalf putting on the one
ring I would be very very hesitant even if we thought we were in the right to simply try to
try to marginalize just on general principle even people like Alex Jones whom on their face
are pretty ridiculous like you said you should sit down with Adolf Hitler and talk to the man
I agree with you to play a little devil's advocate please is Alex Jones might be a bad example but
if we look at because he has a face he is a human he's a real person there is also trolls on the
internet for Chan the worry I have with those folks is that and there might be parallels to
martial arts is they practice guerrilla warfare meaning they don't necessarily want to arrive
at the truth they just always want to cut at the ankles of the powerful like they want to always
break down the powerful and even if they I mean it's they turn everything into a game so they
let's see if we can make the world let's see if we can make a trend that Bill Gates is a pedophile
right they make it into a game they get excited about this game they see the powerful let's see
if we can convince that like who is the most positive person we can think of let's see if we
can turn them into evil and they've tried that would like would like everybody and and it seems
to stick and they're good at it you know some would argue whatever you think about our current
president that he has some elements of that which is he's figured out whatever this music
of social discourse that's going on he's figured out how to always troll the mainstream
like flow of consciousness that's the the media he always kind of says stuff that annoys a very
large number of people and he enjoys that because it's like taking the powerful taking the way things
were before and he like shakes it up by saying the most inappropriate thing almost on purpose or
instinctually and so on the problem I have with that is that doesn't the powerful thing there is
it brings the power the those in power down a notch that's a great thing the negative thing is it
doesn't push us closer to a nuanced careful rigorous discourse towards truth it's like showing up to
a party and just like starting to yell it doesn't create a good conversation it just makes everything
it just makes everything into a game where truth doesn't even seem like a thing we can even hope
to achieve that makes sense and I guess as you mentioned we'll come back to another movie because
I don't do books and do movies some people just want to watch the world burn right and I guess
there's that's a creepy creepy you know kind of urge that some people have and then also is some
people you're like hey would you like to throw a brick through that glass window you're like yeah
I'm not gonna do that because I think about what's going to what's gonna what's gonna occur like
something's gonna be hurt someone's property not gonna do it versus hey you want to see what'll
happen like yeah sure you know kids are always like my son he's grabbed spider man and dropped
small table spider man fell my spider man didn't fall Sean like he dropped him you knocked him
off the table and he'll grin and basically you know it's an interesting thing like you said
like playing that Pete these people are appealing to and you know and also almost like the little
dog factor of like I people do want to watch the powerful get taken down a notch for all the good
and the not good of that just plenty of people it seems to me that have found their way to incredibly
high positions some some have just found themselves there and many many many many many people you
know men and women of all backgrounds are brilliant and have worked hard and yeah of course there's
luck and there's there's luck into everything they're you know LeBron James in spite of being
the best basketball player on God's green earth is fortunate that he didn't get hit by a car you
know it's fortunate they didn't tear his knee you know but thankfully we get to see all these things
you know but um I guess uh it's if people don't have any skin in the game you never know what
they're gonna do and I think that's the problem with the internet you know that people get to be
nameless be faceless that's why guerrilla fighters are outside of the bounds of war like you don't
have a uniform on like I don't know who you're from you don't get the same treatment that a soldier
gets um for and people well that's crazy I'm actually there's reasons for this because otherwise
people are able to assail things and there's no there's no one responsible there's no way to go
and say hey where's where did this come from what's the root of this what how can I address this
and I think that's the problem of the internet's problem of twitter this problem places like
4chan I wouldn't mind seeing that type of stuff go away if I'm frank but that's not the same thing
as people with a face people with people who are willing to stand there and say hi my name is so and
so even if I have ridiculous beliefs hopefully you know people will hear me out and then if I'm
wrong educate me but uh I guess you hope that the real I guess in my mind antidote to all of this
silliness is education and and I think that that's something that we're you know critical thinking
is is not necessarily I went to school in America and you know I feel very fortunate but critical
thinking is not something that's that's focused on I mean and it's it's tough it's almost like
talking about jujitsu it's tough to teach critical thinking when I don't know any words you have to
teach me techniques you can't teach me to be an artist but recognize that the techniques are the
beginning not the end ultimately it's the artistry that we are searching for not just the not just
the science or there are the biorote memorization and I guess you know you'd hope that people's
ability to think critically and recognize that majority rule or whoever's loudest does not
mean that they're right by any stretch of the imagination and we don't appeal to that and we
don't bow to that will help them to help inoculate them against the ridiculous things that come out
of these places these dark places that that are objectively not great but the I guess all circling
back if even if we swatted these you know these bad things out of existence right now we've got
to be very very careful doing that because it's who's doing the swatting this political group
that's in power right now the people that support a current president would maybe feel a certain way
the people that support another option would feel differently as to what exactly defines toxic and
you know I guess that that's what gives me pause yeah and but also the grace thing I tend to believe
that the technology you said education but the the platforms we use like twitter and the reddit
and all these platforms have a role to play to teach us grace meaning they they should help us
incentivize the kind of behavior that is incentivized in real life like being a dick
in real life is not incentivized like one on one interaction like there's cases where it is but
usually being kind to each other is incentivized on the internet it's not like you get likes for
being for mocking people in a funny in a humorous way and it could be dark kind of mocking depending
on the community you can go you can go to the appearance if somebody's a little fat or a little
too skinny you can comment on their appearance the hair the way the hair looks like the appearance
stuff it could be on the people comment all the time on the level of eloquence of my speech
go fuck yourself I like it it's creepy though watching watching previously like this used to
be lowbrow though like people doing this type of stuff it's creepy watching like our political
figures get into this type of game yes but again it's a little bit refreshing right it's the
my hope with Donald Trump was is that he would shake up the the people who wear suits usually
the like if you're from DC I remember like showing up I actually didn't wear what I usually wear in
DC because I was like everybody's wearing a suit and tie when I was like giving talks and stuff
except for much who wears jeans and a t shirt doesn't give a damn much is a forever renegade
but I don't even remember what oh yeah so my hope with Trump was the huge shake up that system to
say like like to inject new ideas to inject new energy of course the way it turned out
is different but like there's a it turns out that you might want to have somebody who's like like
an Andrew Yang type character who is is full of ideas that are very different and inject the energy
new energy into the system through youthful new ideas versus through the troll that like
that's very good at sort of mocking and like playing outside the the rules of the game
but Trump did reveal powerfully I don't know what to think of it that it's just a game
and you don't have to play by the rules that's both inspiring and dark deeply depressing right
yeah and I don't know what to do with it I don't I mean the same I'm not drawing parallels
not drawing parallels between our president and Adolf Hitler but it's certainly and there's a lot of
in history a lot of positive and a lot of negative things happen when charismatic leaders
realize they don't have to play by the rules you can just flip the table it's the that
Kevin Spacey show oh house cards house of cards where you just flip the table or whatever you
don't have to play by the rules of the chess game you can flip the table one wonders if that's
always been done in private you know I guess because that's I mean even look obviously in
the United States is a is a republic but we had we had bush then we had Clinton then we had more
bush then we had President Obama then we were about to have another Clinton that's fairly creepy
yeah even on its own but now we added another I mean I'm sure we'll have a generation of Trump's
no gee we uh you know I'm Russian so I think we humans like kings still and queens there's something
we're attracted to the the thing we talked about coaches there's something in us that
longs to towards that authoritarian control one of the beautiful things about America
the second amendment is we also like individual freedom that's one of the one of the unique
aspects at the founding of this country and still and for me is the beacon of hope that
somehow there's the fire of freedom burns in there like that Texas feel that gives me hope
that f u energy that revolts against the power which as we discussed power corrupts and ultimately
leads to sort of degradation of the whoever's ruling the people it's interesting though like it
seems to me maybe I'm just I don't know if I'm reading this properly when I when I see it but
it's it seems to me that that like you said that that you know flip the bird I'm going to do me
within reason like as long as I'm not hurting you uh is idea that that very much at least in my
mind defines the American ideal or at least part of the consciousness of the United States
is is under attack to a certain extent you know um and if only like I can think to like you know
maybe generation behind us um it's it's becoming more collectivist you know for all the good and
also the not good of that and it's uh you know not in not in term not not in terms of policy at this
point but just in terms of like uh consciousness and I wonder if that's a an internet thing you
know people are more in touch with one another than they've as far as I'm can tell who've ever
been or at least more than in my lifetime and uh you know the rest of the world seems much closer
than it did you know living in Virginia California seems very far away being on the internet it's
just right there I can hear about it I can see it I can I can interact with people from there
you know I remember uh you know being in Tennessee at uh you know one time and then and reading about
you know events taking place in you know the Middle East and that just seemed like a mile away
seemed like a unbelievably far distance and then another time when you're in DC you just feel like
oh you read about something happening in Paris and it just feels like it's just right around the
corner because DC is a seat of a a seat of power where things are just occurring all the time and
you know I guess you you wonder about that's where I come back to the group decisions to
not listen to this person or to cancel this or to you know we all the moral majority shall do the
following as opposed to as long as you're not hurting me and long as you're not hurting anyone
else I have to let you do I have to let you be on general principle even if I don't like you I'm
very free to not like you I'm free to speak out against you but I'm not it is not within my right
or and not with it and it's not I I would not be right to attempt to attack you and that is an
interesting thing though when we see words being redefined or words being defined whether it's
toxicity whether it's violence if I think that what you're saying is is your speech is by itself
you know a violence or a precursor to violence I'm justified in doing all sorts of things you
know and and that creeps me out significantly because again even if it ends up being pointed
in a good direction initially it's only a matter of time and actually that brings me to another
dune oh yeah I got all day um how much are they paying you but we about say the uh the
frank herbert estate not enough frankly uh let's see and how many books are there in dune uh that's
a gen question you also have I read the whole series but not a couple of the I read all the
prequels as well with the exception of a couple is there a book one for dune dune would be book one
and even the prequels it's still all better if you start like I read dune and then read the
original what is it six and then I went back and started to read some things just like watching
star wars you want to start at episode four whatever yeah I think so that's the way that's
the move and then stop at six call it a day watch the Mandalorian but well I thought you're not
walking back you're no I like the Mandalorian yeah that is what I said I was told that I was
harmless for not liking baby Yoda boy we don't talk about a couple of the movies not including the
Mandalorian the Mandalorian's fine it's the more recent movies that we don't like to talk about
oh the what's his name the goofy guy uh Ryan no no no the creature the goofy creature with the
jar jar yeah jar jar yeah do you ever see the the the jar jar banks is actually like the dark lord
of the sith theory that fixed the whole initial trilogy we're like he's he's like goofing around
and like making it all the way through battles and winning are like wait a minute he oops his way
he walks over to a pool does a triple back flip falls in you're like it's just bizarre that he's
the this is the alex jones theory of of star wars he's actually running everything he was the one
that actually was like hey we should vote in chancellor chancellor palpatine or senator palpatine
like right before they put jar jar in charge first off what did they think was going to happen
and second off that was I would think that'd be great you're like oops oh man I guess he's the
emperor now that would have been great but actually to the to the cancel and all the other stuff again
it's just like you'd hope that it gives pause and I think about this for fighting because a lot of
times I'll use this example people and people like fight fans and you know like UFC they love
people that run out and try to murder each other and it's entertaining and it's super entertaining
but you know Floyd Mayweather doesn't resonate with people as much it's like people started I
remember the time when Floyd was not as popular now people think people love Floyd because
he's 50 and oh Floyd and oh man finally he had so much success that we all can't help but recognize
the man's genius and greatness but prior to that oh he's boring he's this he's that he fights you
know with he's circumspect he's cautious he's he's pressing he's intelligent deeply intelligent and
when you watch people go out and try to murder each other you can flip a coin a hundred times and
you know you can get you could be lucky enough to get a hundred heads but it's still a coin flip
and I think that that's what's going on all the time is you know people are getting an outcome
that they want but it wasn't a well thought out situation and that's why you'll win by five in a
row by knockout and then lose three in a row and then people will go well what happened to that guy
he used to be so great and you're like no he's doing what he's always been doing it's just it was
getting great outcomes on a coin flip prior and it's getting negative outcomes on a coin flip now
but uh I guess what I would say is it watches it's interesting watching you know I guess
this societal beliefs become such a thing that we're almost adopting on a religious level if
we're not careful if if when I say religious level I mean like like pan life like this is
guiding all of my choices for all the good and the bad of that and this is a dune quote is
when religion and politics travel in the same car the writers believe that nothing can stand in their
way their movements become headlong faster and faster and faster they put aside all
thoughts of obstacles and forget that the precipice does not show itself to the man in a blind rush
until it's too late and I think that that's again the the pause we go oh man thank goodness we have
this guy that wants to rebuild Germany he'll put us back where we need to be and you stop questioning
any your own judgment your own just you start you stop thinking essentially right I'm not allowed
to question this oh well of course this is correct of course it's well of course I'm right I intended
to do right so of course my actions are correct I mean how many times have any of us intend to do
something helpful and ended up doing something less and you know plenty of people who intend to
do harm could by accident do something decent and I guess it's like you know I'm not saying anything
you know terribly terribly you know insightful but it's just one of those where it's hard to
it's hard to say in the moment and that's where you hopefully caution you would counsel some degree
of caution and that that's what worries me with with people deciding that we're also right about
this or we're also right about that and attempting to rather than win the argument silence the
counter argument no matter how crazy it may seem because I just think that that idea even when it's
pointed in a good direction initially it's only a matter of time you're amongst many things
a jujitsu black belt one of the things that people are really curious about white belts and blue
belts in jujitsu but also people haven't tried the art is what does it take to be a jujitsu black
belt I think that you know everyone's journey is a little bit different but the one thing that the
Calvin Coolidge quote you know determination persistence is the only thing that that will
win in the end it will always win in the end not brilliance not toughness not education it's
persistence and I think that having the belief that no matter what happens to me I will proceed
forward and I will figure out how to make this happen how our high water I think is the one thing
that ties together all of the people that I've ever met that made it through whatever it was that
they were going through because you know sometimes you can get lucky and you can have an easy time
or and that luck could be you had a good situation it could be I mean like in the obvious sense of
like where you're living where you're training what's going on you had a good situation you're
unbelievably athletic oh you're you're going to be an astronaut you're brilliant and an Olympic
athlete you know like well that's a fantastic situation you know you won the genetic lottery
and I'm sure you were taught as well but you also won the genetic lottery it's a determination is the
one thing though because that person could have a very easy go of it initially and then tear their
knee and then they're no longer the the superhuman physical specimen that they were the only thing
that will keep them going is persistence and I think that that I would just say that persistence
I say I'll just put one foot in front of the other and sometimes I can see the path ahead
and sometimes it's beyond my vision but I will not stop I may even slow down but I won't stop
and that's the only thing that I can say that I've seen tie everyone together because there's
so many ways to the top of any mountain and there's so many different personalities and
skills and backgrounds involved but everyone everyone carries on so at the core the foundational
advice is just don't quit just keep going that's the lesson of martial arts I think you know we
think it's like how to be strong or how to be how to win but in reality it's like how to persist
how to endure because it's all of us have been beaten so many times and gotten beaten up so many
times and thought about quitting have I ever thought about quitting absolutely have I ever
quit never I will never ever quit ever I can say you might knock me out I will be damned if I quit
what's the darkest moment is it injury related like is it uh so like to me like two possibilities
I've fortunately never been seriously injured but I think that's a dark place to be like having
to be out for many months uh for um as Jen was saying like with a head injury especially like
the uncertainty that's one and then the other side is if you have big ambitions as a competitor
or realizing that you're not as good like those those doubts were like I kind of suck
how am I supposed to be a world the greatest fighter of all time if I if if like several
people in the gym are kicking my ass those are the two things that paralyze you I think that
everyone's darkest moment is maybe different looking from the outside for Ryan I wouldn't say
that he's had injuries and he's had bad ones I wouldn't say that was his darkest moment I think
for me I would say some of my head injury was my darkest moment absolutely and I have torn
my ACL twice I've torn my shoulders four times I've had lots of surgeries for me the orthopedic
injuries were not the most difficult it was the brain injury for others that might be the case
for them maybe they've never experienced an injury and maybe for them that's their darkest moment
from the outside obviously Ryan can speak to this more but for Ryan I think it was the
inability to to perform at certain points to the the missing of opportunities that for him
from my perspective watching him go through and having seen various points of his growth from
from early purple dot on I think the hardest time for him looking in obviously was uh when
he would hit moments where he wasn't able to perform for various reasons he couldn't get fights he
he was having difficulties there I think that that was the hardest point for him
did you did you think like with the head injury that you might not never be able to do jiu jitsu
again yeah I mean I I mine was very um it was really bad and it was just the one hit but I
had a looping memories for seven months didn't know it because when your brain's messed up you're
not even aware that you're looping um and so uh I saw two different neurologists I find like it
took a very long time um I didn't know if I was going to be able to have like linear thoughts or
read a book I didn't know at certain points if I could listen to music again you know without
making my head hurt um and so uh it was almost two years before I woke up in the morning without a
headache um just waking up before I even start my day and so that so that's even bigger than
jiu jitsu that's just life that's just that's just hard and I think that you can experience so many
things I've had all these injuries um we lost a baby when I was 15 15 weeks um we've had all
these experiences and what the hardest point for me not saying all those things weren't hard but it's
kind of like as you go through these you just realize like life goes on and you have to keep
working at it and you have to keep going and you asked me earlier offline what did I feel depressed
and not for my head injury I don't think that at least in the moment I had a any recognition of that
it's kind of like but I think different people's personalities I have kind of the like buckle down
and just keep going and and sometimes it's not until lots of time later that you realize wow that
was really hard because you were just struggling to live and and function and do the things that
you need to do along do you mind jumping on just like this part of the conversation just for a few
minutes over do you mind no just sitting together oh no no just for a little bit sorry it'd be cool
so we put a face to it you know uh is it okay with you yeah it's fine with me it's fine with you
by the way what was the head injury if you don't mind sharing someone hit there had dropped their
knee on the back of my head during training it was a lot bigger than me so one strike to the back
of the head is too much for someone there's a reason that's outlawed in MMA right someone 50 pounds
everything you drop their knee on the back of your head once and it's it's the funny thing about
getting hit right you never can really be sure what's going to happen I think it's actually one of
the magical parts about jiu jitsu where like if you choke me if you we know what's going to occur
you hit someone they might be completely unharmed like you might be punching Tony Ferguson in the
face and like he you need to hit him with a sledgehammer to affect this man and then other
people they could get really badly hurt which I guess it's back to your point about you know
street fighting and things like that and a serious serious potential you know second third order
consequences of any action that we take but yeah that's a that's a tricky thing about getting hit
how does it make you feel that like the the really shitty thing about injuries to me was that like
you start thinking like well if I did this one little thing different like this wouldn't have
happened today like one one moment changes your entire life is that do you do you think that way
or is that totally counterproductive um you can't help but think that way when you've had them on
of injuries I've had now because I've had more than most people's fair share um as my orthopedic
says you don't want to win that you don't want to with the contest of who's had the most but since
you have built me a pool yeah um but I think you can't help but think that way sometimes but I
definitely don't think it's I think it can be facilitated if you don't put yourself up too much
because thinking about why have I been subject to so many injuries and and a lot of it comes to
just um almost all of mine in particular people a lot heavier than me so we're to I but if I've
been training martial arts 15 years I'm obviously on the much smaller side I'm a woman I've done
thousands and thousands of rounds with people 50 pounds plus heavier than me I mean years
not training with anyone less than 50 pounds which is 50 pounds is almost half my body weight
and when you also add testosterone the natural um physiological advantages of men not just are
they heavier with more mass they're faster the more explosive they're stronger um if they're the
same size and so I think that the willingness to be in that environment over and over and over again
creates a lot of strength resiliency willingness to continue but it also like in order to do that
you almost have to uh for me the way I was approaching it was like pretend like I wasn't
more vulnerable um and just be willing to step in and step in and step in and take it until you
make it kind of thing make it until you make it kind of yeah like I'll just one day I'll be strong
enough and you avoid an injury for most for most of those rounds I would injury the problem that
Ryan points out is that like you could do thousands of rounds but if one person that size that strength
that hover reacts in a way that you don't expect it doesn't it's not like an oops it's like always
major do you regret any of it like I think that most no one I know has experienced the degree
of injuries that I've experienced and I started it at a time when uh in 2005 is very different than
now where you have the coaches have more control over what you're doing they're more aware in general
about a lot of the injuries there's just a lot more people who are uh hobbyists than when I started
there were hobbyists but it was different kind of hobbyists you know than now um now our girls
can train with other girls they don't have to do thousands of rounds with somebody significantly
more powerful than them um and uh for the drawbacks and the benefits of that you know as with anything
um so I think I think that I don't think I would go back and change it there were times
after one of my injuries where I said to Ryan I said I quit I'm done I'm not doing this anymore I
probably said it more than once but there was one time I was really serious in 2012 um I was
really serious I tore my shoulder I had I was looking at missing a big competition again in
the world for my second or third year in a row after injuries and I said I'd quit my job two
years before and I'm like I'm done and Ryan before that had always been you know I keep
me focused and then he kind of said okay if you want to be done be done just just have a good time
no I'm really done I didn't want to train anymore okay okay and then you know I think he helped
facilitate a moment for me to go um visit a friend some friends some girls that were doing a girls
camp who are close to my size or some friends of mine to go train and I was like oh wait
I do love this thing it's harder for me on a daily basis but that doesn't mean I don't love
this thing and it really helped change my mind I started to connect with other people travel more
myself um because previously he had done that but I hadn't really done that I think there was a point
where um when I started to do it was just for fun I just wanted to sport after college I played
sports as a kid I want to I just want to exercise I wasn't into the martial arts he's giving me a
hard time about it because he was always very how can you not care about martial arts I don't know
I just want to play sports um and Ryan was really big and took kind of the philosophy side of the
martial arts aspect um he used to give me a hard time and I think after that moment this moment
where I looked at myself and I said do I want to keep doing this is when I started to appreciate
jiu jitsu take it took off some of the pressure I'd been feeling I think as Ryan's girlfriend but I
had a full time job a long time it was never my goal to be a jiu jitsu world champion and I think
after that moment where I was like you know I really do like this I really do want to keep this I had
this moment like anytime where you're like I'm doing this for me I'm not doing this for him and I
think that that's um I think that that was really lucky for me because how often in our lives do we
have a kind of a challenge where we have to stop and we have to say is this really what I want how
often in a relationship do you do that how often in any type of lifestyle or job do you stop and
do you really ask yourself is something really difficult happen that you look and you go am I
just doing this because it's convenient and easy or is this what I really want to do yeah I've had
those moments like this this podcast is one of those things is like you you stop and think like
I actually love this and it's uh I had that with jiu jitsu too I don't think I had said until like
brown belt that I stop I mean yeah it's when you first face real challenges you think like
why am I doing this it's I think most of my progression was why not I think that's the right
the leap of faith and then at a certain point you think like what why am I doing this and
if you can answer honestly that because I love it it's kind of a liberating feeling it's a it's a
yeah it's so it's so powerful it's an acceptable for the opportunity to be there right because
you love it and yeah man I yes great gratitude it's yeah so it's it's ultimately gratitude yeah
let me ask you this so Ryan said like what what is it I took over your thing yeah this is no nobody
cares about Ryan I wouldn't yeah I'll photoshop him out or whatever however you edit you do that
be great put Sean Connery's head yeah just like a dune ad over here exactly Sean Connery I can get down
that is that the sexiest man in Sean Connery in the dune universe that's my understanding okay I think
in any universe yeah well mind gossing give him we actually named our son after Sean Connery oh yeah
oh yeah sorry three five notion of yes yes he was in the rock that was I love all those
awesome flame Nicholas Cage oh yeah Connery's face all greatest movie of all time this accent
and Connery was so awesome I don't know where it's from Alabama I guess or something I love that they
got like Steve Buscemi in there like we need Steve Buscemi in this thing and we got him Dave Chappelle
yeah that's right yeah he's a prisoner in April yep greatest movie of all time should have won an
Oscar Dave Chappelle also in Blue Street with Martin Lawrence and then what do you call it a
Robinham men in tights oh Robin in tights was one of my favorites as a kid I've baked but Robin yeah
without that's a good uh wow we just listed off some really bad 90s movies but you take that back
for telling our age yeah so about speak yourself so what like in your view I don't mean to
from like a smaller person I guess that's an interesting thing while Jiu Jitsu is like
that uh small I don't know hopefully it's not a bad thing um elf elves are taller
like with all these like uh bigger people you could still enjoy the art like what does it take
to get a black belt to excel to quote unquote master the art gosh everyone has such a different
path Ryan's promoted six seven people something like that and I think about half of them have had um
have kids have families have other careers um at the time some of them competed a lot some of them
have never competed or rarely competed some haven't competed a long time um some had started
different places they everyone's had different journeys uh even in our own little group of seven
um I think only maybe only two or three were were high level competitors of that group um at the
higher belts very like brown black maybe um and so it's just different for every person and that's
something that that you know we try to tell her since we have 400 students and um do we have a
we don't really have anyone who's you know a stated other other than like other coaches like Adam
but we don't have anyone it's like a stated high level competitor as a student at the moment we
people look at our gym and go it's lots of competitors it's not lots of competitors it's
never been lots of competitors and we've had ones and twos here and there um but really everybody's
in it for the long term if they're in it sometimes the the high level competitors are the ones that
are more likely to drop off because they have a bit of success particularly at at blue or purple
and then they realize how hard it is at brown and black and then they they have a hard time
continuing on that that path and then they can't look at themselves as a non competitive hard time
continuing with jiu jitsu I think whereas sometimes it's the guy who comes in as the white belt and
he trains you know twice a week every week and the next thing you know he's been there for two
or three years like oh he's a blue belt he's a purple belt he's a brown belt and and he's just
consistent um over over a long period of time and willing to take the path and no two people's path
is exactly the same no two people's lives are exactly the same you have um we have students
who started as a white belt as a you know a young adult with no you know no responsibilities and they
train all the time and then they have a job you know then they graduate college then they have a
job then they have married then they have kids then they have different points in their careers and
at different points in your life jiu jitsu will be there you know for whatever way that you're
willing to accept it it's place I think that's actually kind of what back to the initial question
we discussed about you know what makes a warrior you know and and also like what makes something
or someone and you know particularly impressive in my mind is like uh what they make out of what
they have um you know one of my favorite movies ever is forest gump and it's obviously it's it's
just if you can't because I've heard people are doing forest gump sucks I'm like I don't like
use a person and uh like you have no heart at all but basically uh it's the story of someone
that tries hard and it's like yeah but it's it's funny movie but it's like um you know I guess
you meet each person where they are you know and obviously you want everyone needs to be pushed we
all need to be pushed we need friends and people around us that push us to be better versions of
ourselves all the time and and as you mentioned the people you spend all of your time around
deeply impact you um and we have to be willing to be pushed it takes a leap of faith for me to trust
me to put some of my self in my my you know I guess my ability my control my personal agency
as it were in the hands of someone else that I that I trust and that I respect but if if I can do
that well again maybe I never become you know high level black belt competitor but you know I had
four of the things I was doing in my life I also have a family I have this I have that you know
what that person was able to accomplish in the martial arts relative to what they were able
to put in this phenomenal you know other times someone could be a very successful black belt and
it might be a bum because they could have been a lot more and you know they could have done more
they could have focused more and there's no shame in deciding that you don't want to do that but
whatever it is that you're you're invested in I remember the uh take it uneasy podcast and that
I love because you know I'll just chill out I like resting it's like vacation oh who wants to
go on vacation I'll go on vacation for a day or two you want to spend three weeks on vacation
like I kill myself like get me out of here like this is horrible this is I'm a waste of life I'm
not doing anything useful you're technically on vacation right now right well this is fun though
this is like a one day vacation exactly but if you know if you had okay I would I'm sure you're
thinking about jumping off of the building right now but if you had to if you had to talk to me for
you know like three days I'm sure you just you probably shut me off the building I don't blame
you I'll be dead people but yeah five hours in but yeah but you know it is it's like you want to
be pushing towards something um because otherwise what's the purpose of being here you know it's
not just a college it's doing something useful building growing as a person helping others
do the same if that's within your power at any given time but I think that's kind of the neat
thing about martial arts is it can be many many different things to many different people you
know I finally for instance was able to get a college degree let this this year that which I
mean it's not a big deal for most people but for me it was a big deal because I was going back and
finish yeah and I never envisioned ever going back and that's a hard step to to go back and finish
that's uh it weighs heavy on you if you don't it's interesting yeah I was just I was more proud of
that than most things I've ever done if I'm honest you know and it was neat and I really enjoyed it
and it was the process of doing it but you know or my academic credentials impressive like not in
the least but for me it's like it was a big deal for me personally to take that step and to go back
and do that and I was I was proud of the the direction and because it would have been easy like
do I need to do it like no I'm you know I'm business I'll do okay I'll try I'll keep fighting
but I was happy to take the time in between fights when I was when I was was unbooked for an opponent
to do something productive rather than just I'll just hang out you know like I can still train
every single day but I can also train and go to school people go to the Olympics while going to
school I can I can do martial arts and and go to school one thing I gotta ask is uh you know a bunch
of women listen to this podcast if they haven't done jiu jitsu I think it'd be kind of intimidating
to uh step on the mat with a bunch of bros uh that like enjoy somehow killing each other
there like how do you succeed in that environment to where you can learn this art learn how to
beat all those people up um oh gosh is there any advice I mean another way to ask that is like
if if uh any women listening to this are interested in starting jiu jitsu like is there advice for
that journey honestly I think it's just walking in the door and starting sometimes I don't know
how to respond to that because I'm not at I don't view myself as typically anxious particularly um uh
in in interactions with other people or new people that's shy shy is not a word that has
been used for me by if you ask my family and um they joke because our son talks a lot he's
advanced verbally and they're always like oh well let's we know where he gets that from like
because he just doesn't stop talking he narrates everything he does um and so they always tease
because that's like I'm known for for kind of talking a lot um but so I haven't been typically
I'm not I don't consider myself a shy person so for me going into um a new room a new group of
people is you know there's there's always that you don't really know who they are how they're
going to treat you but I typically but I I don't have a lot of anxiety with that so I don't if
that's something that's going to put something up I don't really know how to to address that
particular feeling um but in terms of all of the rooms I've been in I have popped in the
gypsy gyms before I knew Ryan in Florida like I traveled for my job so in Germany and Florida
and California and places where where I don't know anyone they don't know me
and I have never once had anyone be anything other than than kind and solicitous and helpful
and long before when I was a white belt and a blue belt and didn't know anything and
and didn't know anyone and um I just think that it's a community of people that it's so cool that
no matter where you go in the world um I walked into a gym in Prague one time where only two
people spoke English and and it was just yeah it's weird you know it's weird it's weird that like
part of a group and they're like oh let me tell you what it's part of a cult right yeah but it's
like a positive cult like it for sure that's what we would say as cultists yeah that's true yeah
that's true I mean we do need to murder everybody you practice like Edo I mean yeah that's this cult
uh deeply believes it no but there is a like if you look at different kinds of games like chess
and so on like there's a skepticism I mean there's not a brotherhood sisterhood feeling
with jiu jitsu it's like you can roll into most places even like with judo like I can see the
contrast like because I've trained in judo places it uh it's more like tribal like you walk in
and like who is this like there's that kind of feeling with jiu jitsu there's uh less so there
is a little bit with like the competitors there's always like the competitors feeling each other
out usually like the blue belts but like outside of that in terms of if you don't get the if you
walk in with the vibes of just loving the art and just wanting to have a good time you're like
welcome it's it's really cool it's really fascinating it's a really great thing I think and as a woman
I think you you think you're walking into these rooms of these you know big strong tough guys and
um if anything I would I would say that they're almost like much more solicitous when a woman comes
in there and not like they're just like hitting on you all the time you know it's just that you walk
in and everyone is like oh cool you want to do this thing that I love let me make sure you have a
good experience and take care of you and I think that's that's an experience that that I hope people
have when they come into our gym and and I've I've always felt when I walked into other gyms and and
so you know we try our best to make that comfortable and and it can be a little uncomfortable because
there are when you walk into a male dominant environment there's conversations and topics
there's a different style of camaraderie and joking that a lot of men will do that um maybe
some women are more uncomfortable with I grew up with four brothers so I kind of maybe was a little
more desensitized to that um and I worked for the department of defense for for a while too so
before I I I see you're with the government yeah so so I did that I'm already skeptical yeah
I'm not oh you left I'm not gonna ask you about UFOs then because you're not gonna tell me the
truth no they exist oh yeah no you just freaked out a lot of people okay
but yeah by the way where's where's your school because people always ask like where
uh well we're outside of Washington DC in northern Virginia in Falls church you always
want to pick like what's the best school if I try out a list place or if I want to move to this place
so that's well I mean obviously we're biased but yeah we're in the Washington DC area the best
okay we just took a little break now we're back let me ask you one thing that a bunch of people
are curious about you're one of the innovators first of all you're one of the great innovators and
and philosophers and thinkers in jujitsu right but we are also one of the innovators in terms of leg
locks and and the 50 50 position and just like the fact that legs have something to do in jujitsu
the the under the other popularizer or innovator in the space is John Donahar and his whole group
of guys do you have thoughts about their whole system of leg locks and their ideas about jujitsu
and so on? Sure I I guess uh you know obviously you know John and the students at HENZO who've
been able to do fantastic things competitively in the past number of years and you know you
mentioned innovators in the in that kind of you know section of jujitsu I would be uh I'd love to
bring up some guys like Dean Lister um of course uh Masakaze Minari in fact a lot of what was going
on in like 90s Japan like combat submission wrestling there was some crazy gnarly stuff that
it's just it's on grainy VHS tape but like stuff that if people were doing now they go oh my god
that's brand new like there's um it's it's been I think these are things that have been around for a
while um in various places I first learned the 50 50 position just like the leg entanglement of it
from Brandon Vera actually at a seminar at Lord Urban's Martial Arts I think in 2005
he learned it from Dean Lister uh who used it to submit Alexandria Kakareko a really really
tough nogi guy at ADCC on the in the run that uh Dean made to the to the gold medal in the absolute
division which was a great performance at the time first American to do that um and uh you know
and I actually saw a video I mean first a boss Rooton actually broke I think Guy Mezger's
foot with a 50 50 heel hook that he actually grabbed his heel and his and his toes went
and in pank races back when they had like the man panties and the high uh high boots on yeah and uh
dude that was gnarly boss Rooton is underappreciated as like as like he double oh yeah like and oh yeah
like you know his leverage his leverage it's that's like a toehold that's you know that goes the
other way and it's like it either doesn't work or breaks in half and uh well he's uh is people
don't often think of boss Rooton as an innovator but he is in a way like he uh you know talk about
like Elon Musk and first principles thinking in terms of physics he like just feels like he just
gets the job he figures out like the simplest way to get the job done of breaking things and
establishing control and hurting people remember that was back to the boss if you listen to boss
Rooton do any like commentary for any of the uh the big MMA shows or any MMA show way back when
anytime guys were clenching he's like the guy should roll for a knee bar he was saying that way
back when and now people are doing it all the time with varying degrees of success it's it's
funny it's like it's also tough to be uh I think like a breakaway thinker I mean you know group
think is a real thing and group inertia and it's it's neat to see um you know particularly at a
time when maybe that type of stuff was less accepted um you know someone going hey I'm gonna
I'm gonna run off in this other direction I think you know whoever you know the inventor of electricity
in my mind is a lot more impressive than whomever not to say that the person down the line isn't
impressive that comes up with an interesting way to use it both are cool but when you think about
just then can you imagine we're sitting here we're like yeah people I'm gonna build an airplane
you're like what are you talking about it's crazy people don't fly I'm like no I'm gonna do it and
of course it's not gonna be as good as the airplane down the line the iterative things that happen
later on but um just being able to go to dream something into existence that you haven't seen
before and then make it happen like takes an unbelievable like strength of character almost
like a force of will because you have you're you're you're blazing a trail that hasn't been
that hasn't been walked before that's the bj pen factor in you know winning the jujitsu world championship
first non brazilian to do that was back in 2001 and then rafael lavato later on it's like he's
you know both of those guys are so unbelievably impressive in my mind for the same reason you
know because they were out there winning at a time when that wasn't a common thing not that it's easy
to win now it's just there's not a psychological hurdle that needs to be leapt I remember you
know when I was early in jujitsu like americans weren't winning the world championships at any
belt I mean bj we all knew bj pen because bj pen did it but it was really really uncommon now it
happens you know on the semi regular basis of course the bj's are so strong europeans are still
strong but uh in australians are coming on as well but uh it's it's definitely kind of an
interesting thing so to come back to you know john danahar and the henzo team obviously they're
doing fantastic things john's has some really really great innovation there and the the the
systematization and the methodology that they're using is uh is great and it's neat to see that's
getting out there I would just also what I would encourage people to make sure that they're you
know catching up on their history because obviously you know john's a brilliant instructor and has
done things you know for the sport that um that are fantastic that haven't been done before but
you know none of us exist in a vacuum and I've learned things from everywhere else so you know
john would say the same I'm sure and uh you know Dean Lister would say the same and it's just neat
when you can kind of trace the history of all of this happening because we've had humanity's had
two arms and two legs for some time at least as long as I've been alive but you mentioned like
airplanes and you think there's something totally new to be invented in jujitsu still not totally
new but like the you know flying isn't new uh but airplanes nevertheless made that much more
efficient is there like new ideas to be discovered in jujitsu still I'd say the reason I'd say yes
is the same reason I would say I believe in alchemy even though I don't no I'm serious like I've got
some some backing for this okay um you know I guess I talk about this with a buddy of mine a lot
like uh and the facilitative versus not facilitative beliefs and if I don't believe something is possible
and I do no investigation towards it I'll never find something even if it's there it's almost like
it's no different than me walking up on a group of people and going like oh man look at these
jerks this is going to suck versus me going oh I wonder what these guys are up to I'm about to
have two very different conversations even though the players in the game are no different my
internal constitution has changed because of of how I've decided to approach the situation so
although I wouldn't personally want to spend all my time trying to turn lead into gold because I
don't believe that it's likely to work only a person who's willing to spend his or her life
in that pursuit will actually get to the bottom of that and also in the in the pursuit of that
they're likely to find other things so I think a lot of times the idea is that humanity is pushed
forward by you know again it's another or since it's got carbon it's like you know human beings
are in this slog it's paraphrasing just in this slog over time and then periodically the humanity
gives birth to genius like someone that invents the wheel invents electricity pushes us forward
you know comes up with with the idea of governance that doesn't you know just start and end with the
point of a sword you know and you know these aren't common things these are unbelievable
advancements that you know that I just me sitting here I didn't come up with them but I just get
the benefit of it so I guess what I would say is a lot of times these ideas are called crazy you
know like as we discussed on kind of offline it's like you know Einstein was brilliant in his 20s
and it was brilliant before that I would suspect but basically you know gets recognized later on
in life and of course we all thought those were great ideas the man was probably roundly mocked
for giant chunks of his life and I guess so it's neat to I would say there's definitely in my mind
things that even if it's just combinations and new to me new ways to see things new ways to
understand different depth of understanding possibly new things new positions new ideas
because even if that's not true the process of going through and acting as if it is and
believing like that and focusing and and trying to investigate will make any of us will push us
all forward we're sitting there you know obsessing over the cult of our current knowledge I think
is the biggest the biggest danger and the biggest cause of stagnation that exists anywhere.
Yeah and it starts with believing the the impossible which is kind of interesting
one of the things that's really inspiring to me is to see people out there which which sadly are rare
who kind of have a combination of two things one is they have a worldview that involves
that includes a lot of ideas that are crazy and the second part is they're exceptionally focused
and competent in bringing that whatever the ideas in that worldview to reality so there's
certainly a lot of people with crazy ideas you know there's a lot of conspiracy theorists they have
way out there beliefs about things but they're not doing much to like make the like build stuff
grounded like they're not engineers or whatever they're just like espousing different crazy ideas
but that's why you get like the Elon Musk type characters and the reason I bring him up a lot
is because like there's not many others to bring up it's like there's not many examples of it
through history the people I mean the guys convinced that we're going to colonize Mars
and basically everybody on earth thinks that's insane everyone except the guy that's going to
do it right except that's going to do it and like you can imagine like a couple hundred years from
now people will I mean first of all they they won't certainly won't remember the haters
they won't remember all the people if if they do remember them they'll remember them in a sense
like people are silly to think that this isn't the obvious path forward like from a perspective
that's what that's what Elon talks about like it's obvious they were going to expand throughout the
universe like so from his perspective from his perspective like but to me it is also obvious
because like either we destroy ourselves or or we'll expand beyond earth like
like there's not many you know we well it's not maybe it's not completely obvious I guess I share
that worldview there's the other possibility that we humans find a sort of an inner peace
where the forces of capitalism will calm down and we'll all just meditate and do yoga and
jiu jitsu and like relax with this whole tech thing where we keep building new technologies but
it's cool to have those kinds of people that just believe the big ambitious crazy dreams
because that's where it starts if you want to build something special you have to first believe
that when you also have to believe strongly enough that you're not vulnerable and I'm
speculating but it's like I can only imagine how many people have told Elon that what he's doing
is crazy so not only did he dream it up he dreamed it up went with it and also went with it in the
face of being told that it's not going to work and then anytime and then also stepped away from
the bitterness because he's done a series of really crazy impressive things and that's only
those little things that I'm aware of but and also staying away from the bitterness of every
single time you did something good initially I all I do is talk down about you and then eventually
I act as of course of course I never apologize and yet you don't let that dampen your spirits for
the next innovation which is pretty incredible to me to watch yeah it's kind of cool I mean
it's contagious to spend time with the guy because he's not it's rogan has the same look to him which
is interesting about these people is like there there's like a hater shield that he's like he
doesn't even like sense them it feels like like it doesn't he doesn't he thinks to uh to Elon it's
like it's obvious I mean he keeps calling it like first principles thinking like physics says it's
true therefore it's true like he's convinced himself that like his beliefs are grounded in the
fundamental fabric of the way the universe works therefore the haters don't matter right and I mean
that's kind of like a system of thought he developed himself through all the difficulty
through all the doubt he's able to take huge risks with basically putting everything he
owes on the line multiple times throughout his life amidst all the drama amidst all the doubts
amidst all like the he's still able to make just clear clear headed decisions it's I don't know
what to make of it but it's inspiring as hell well it's I think it's something's funny I think like
I can only imagine the you know history will look back on him as a brilliant person but that's not
the only there's there's a lot of maybe not numeric not statistically speaking but a lot
numerically on a giant planet of you know billions of people a lot of brilliant people
well you know time place luck fortune and all that other stuff but at the same time
time that clearly isn't the only determining thing in making Elon Musk Elon Musk and obviously
I don't know the guy from adam and but it's an interesting thing that it's not just his
intellect his belief system his structure how he's viewing the world like that's
did he reason his way to that did he not what other factors came in I'm really curious about
that because I guess coming it's again I feel really strongly about people's belief structure
and this the how they view the world being more important than the engine behind it you know it
makes someone resilient or not it makes someone positive or not because you get up 10,000 I think
about this for competitive stuff you get up 10,000 things going properly and one thing going
improperly if you focus on the improper you'll probably fix it at a certain point which is good
facilitative for development in the long term but if you had to go and try to perform a task in the
next five minutes and you're focusing on the negative your confidence and your your belief
in the positive outcome of the future is likely to be damaged or as you could have 25 things going
wrong but you go man I'm sure I'm happy to be alive how fortunate I am this is great I can't
this is I have problems to solve this is awesome versus I list the problems and I start bishing
about them both of them are technically accurate but it's I guess different lenses and I think
that's a really neat thing to see you know someone you know exemplifying that for us.
So maybe to look at the the fighting world there's a million questions I can ask here like one you
mentioned BJ Penn you first of all you're undefeated in the UFC and one of the fights you've had is
against BJ Penn which is a kind of an incredible fight you won performance of the night what did
it feel like to uh to face BJ Penn and to beat him definitively as he did like what's that whole
experience like? I'll be honest I didn't know if I was going to ever be able to fight again after
beating Graham Maynard in 2016 um you know I've had a couple periods of those I was about to join
the army actually and when I was 30 before the for the UFC for Jen sent me over to an ultimate
fighter I didn't want to go because I was like one they're never going to pit me two I'd be terrible
for TV three I'll probably say something I'm gonna get you know burned to death in the streets
you know like this isn't a great idea and then she said we'll go out there see what happens do
it anyway you'll be you'll regret it if you didn't and then I ended up doing ultimate fighter and
then so I fought three times on the show and then I fought for the for the finale so those four
times in like five or six months which was great and then it took me a year to get another opponent
um and that was Graham Maynard and then Gray was obviously very tough guy managed to get a good
outcome there then it took two years to to fight BJ Penn and that was you know obviously I'm
training all the time every single day and that never stops but that was I'll be honest like pretty
deeply frustrating because you know as a human being as an athlete you know I think as an athlete
you die twice like you have an athletic peak or area and then then you go on with the rest of your
life but it is a microcosm for the rest of your life it's like you're you're seeing this the sand
tick away in the hourglass would drop away and you're going man this is these are years between
thirty one thirty two thirty three like I'll be at my best at this time my absolute best physically
now not technically I'm a lot better now than I was before on a plan but at a certain point you will
unless you're Bernard Hopkins you will reach diminishing returns and then I guess the long
the long wait you can feel the clock ticking is this frustrating so why why did it take two years
for BJ that's the question people ask a lot it's like why does nobody want to fight right I don't
know I probably they probably think they'll get infected by whatever this is but I don't I don't
blame them but I would mean you're a really tough opponent is but is the bottom line I'll say that
I'm different I maybe they perceive that the the the threat is greater than the reward I'm hoping
that now that we're ranked number 12 you know in the UFC rankings that that will change and I know
that if we're one more win and then we're in the top 10 that you know now now we're you're there
but uh what I've consistently found is that like randoms want to fight and I'm like go away you
know I didn't come here for you you know because if I wanted to just fight anybody I could go down
to a waffle house and yell until like DMX shows up and we can we can fight because he'll be at the
waffle house too who am I kidding I really want to hang out with DMX but uh you know it's like you
want to when I had the opportunity I'm calling DMX oh my god that was so cool it sounds like a
Netflix show I would never fight DMX we'd be on the same team no but uh anyway um it's I guess um
I accepted fights against uh I asked they got asked about llamas I said yes I got asked about
Dennis Ramirez I said yes um you know like long periods of time and they at that time well you
know in between 2016 and 2018 um I was struggling to have have opponents who would sign up and uh
us I haven't turned down fights I've just said hey you know keep the I don't care about fighting the
randoms and it's and you have a successful school you're like you're running you're martial artists
broadly speaking so it doesn't make sense then to take fights that aren't like right that fit
a certain kind of trajectory for your career and that's when when BJ Penn they said well BJ's
looking for an opponent I was like I'm your guy and uh and I think that you know BJ accepted that
fight because I'm another jujitsu guy I don't think he perceived that I was much of a threat on the
feet um and uh you know I was able to it was neat to get it to compete against someone uh you know
who's one of my heroes one of the people I looked up to in MMA for the longest time and
were you intimidated by that no no I love competing I I don't really get nervous or scared before
fights I'm not afraid to get hurt and not afraid to win I'm not afraid to lose it's I I'm just
excited for the I feel thankful for the opportunity to compete and the opportunity to play when it
matters you know I I just that's the only time I'm interested in playing anymore is when it when
it matters when the opposition is I know that you know it's funny because people pick on on
a lot of some opponents particularly after after the fact like if you if you get a good outcome
well then of course let's beat that guy that guy wasn't that good I'm like well I was that's
after the fact I get to say that and also as the person in the ring you know BJ Penn has
hurt a lot of people in in makes martial arts cage and I could actually absolutely have been on
that list so it was neat to get to compete against someone that I really respect someone that I
looked up to for a long time someone who has a great skill set and also I went up and wait to
fight him in his weight class he didn't have to come down to mine which is where he takes
was lightweight it was lightweight yeah I'm generally a featherweight I walk around at like
158 pounds so um what's uh what's lightweight and featherweight lightweight is 155 with a day
before weighing and featherweight is 145 with a day before weighing so I'm a little bit more
properly sized for featherweight but anyway you know I so I didn't feel like obviously he was giving
up a couple years of age but I was giving up size and all this other stuff and it was you know I
was just excited to have the opportunity to step in against someone like BJ and you know we managed
to get out of there with a with a good outcome without getting too banged up but uh just it was
cool because we tied up on the fence and just even uh the second you know is when you're rolling
with somebody and you touch and you can feel what they're doing you go oh man this guy's really good
you can feel the calm you can feel the small minor adjustments that they're making the subtle
things that they're doing and uh that was one of those things that was really neat and gratifying
because you know you never know sometimes people that you've heard of are a little bit less technically
proficient than you thought and other times you'll meet some guy that you train like who the hell is
this guy how have I not heard of this person and uh BJ was exactly as a jitsu guy what I would have
thought and uh another thing that's another thing to bug me about how people reacted after the fight
is uh you know basically going I'll BJ screwed up this screwed up that and like all right yeah
it's so interesting it's sad I that was you know one of the to me I mean as a fan of both that was
a beautiful moment is uh as a kind of passing of a torch in a sense of exceptional performance
like another one that stands out to me maybe you can comment is I don't understand well maybe I do
why Connor McGregor gets as much hate as he does uh he probably revels in it but I think
he doesn't get enough credit for uh Jose Aldo for the for like for basically you know knocking him out
in the in the in the first few seconds of uh of a fight I mean now Jose is like one of the greatest
fighters ever that's true uh maybe some people can be even put in the top 10 no question and the
like I don't understand why it's doesn't get as much like Connor McGregor doesn't get as much credit
uh as I think he deserves for that and for Eddie Alvarez and all the fights for some reason whenever
Connor McGregor beats somebody well that they they were not that good then like it means like
they were they were there something was off right that's convenient isn't it yeah it's it's it's
quite strange to me but I mean what are your thoughts on uh on Connor McGregor maybe one
way to ask that I'm rushing some obviously also a Khabib fan but I'm also a Connor fan it seems
like there's not many of us who are like fans of both right um what are your thoughts you and
Artem Lobov yeah right the two of us which also is a good fight uh uh tough dude yeah really really
tough dude it's like five languages really interesting cat oh so like oh wow I didn't know
that side of this there's a brain there well on the Khabib versus Connor what do you make
of their first fight what do you do you agree with me that uh they should fight again because I think
it'd be awesome if they fought again in Moscow and uh do you agree with me I'm just gonna put
say things that piss people off but I believe is that Connor actually has a chance to be Khabib
one to Connor absolutely has a chance to be Khabib Connor has a chance to beat anyone that
he steps into that ring with and not just like a mathematical chance you're like oh one of the
billion but like you know like he absolutely it's funny because I won't pretend to know Connor
really well but I first met Connor in 2010 when I was teaching a seminar in uh at Straitless Jim
Ireland in Dublin um and that's actually where I first met all of the coaches that ended up being
on Connor's team um you know John Kavana, Owen Roddy, Gunnar Nelson you know so for I actually
I enjoyed being an ultimate fighter and being on uh you're my favorite team and getting a
train with all the guys there but at the same time the people that I was actually I knew better
were actually the European side all all of Connor's coaches um and uh that was a neat thing because I
got to I met Connor I didn't know who Connor like Connor wasn't Connor at that point yeah that was
before his UFC debut oh yeah well well before yeah I think I think he got in like 2014 maybe
something like that yeah and uh anyway but he was doing well in cage warriors winning the titles
there I think prior to that you know I remember going seeing him on the show and uh also then
getting him trained because I competed uh I was initially slated to fight David Tamer for the
ultimate fighter finale before getting put into fight autumn uh for the title for the show so I
went over to Ireland to train for a couple days and basically it was neat to watch him watch him
work I mean man he's focused and trains a lot and he's very very smart and very very hard working
and I think a lot of times people get stuck in the uh in this um you know and they almost want to
believe that this was lucky or this this person you know that they're not working that hard they're
just out there they got there with their mouth and that's that's just not the case and um you
know I don't know what it's like you know obviously Connor's very well off right now and I don't know
how hard how seriously he's training what he's doing I can't speak to any of that but uh there's
no question that that he has skills to be dangerous and one of the funny things obviously that could
be fight went could be his way could be was a great fighter and and also has the chance to beat
anyone in that ring at any given time but uh there's there was a Connor you know it's uh one
that he can he can put anybody away and as you mentioned I think that he doesn't get the credit
for the Eddie Alvarez fight doesn't get the credit for the Josie Aldo fight because it was
almost so much of a letdown I remember that happened the same weekend that I did the ultimate
fighter finale and you're like all right wait what yeah it almost doesn't feel like a fight
happened but we mentioned Miyamoto Musashi I mean Musashi was famous for the way he poked
and prodded the people with what he was doing whether overtly or not it's like oh we're supposed
to fight to the death in uh you know at 3 p.m. tomorrow great four p.m. rolls around I'm just
not there five I mean you remember all the all the antics and nonsense that Connor was pulling
prior to that like speaking person that's not something I would feel comfortable doing but
it's like everyone's different and the effect that it had on on Josie was I mean beyond evident
when was the last time Josie started the started the fight with leaping left hand leaping right
hand you're like wait what and then he was obviously you know living rent free and in Josie's head
at that point and that was a combination of psychological you know ability and and where
with all and then physical and it reminded me of the way Muhammad Ali would would bother people
and whatnot and the fact that he's a polarizing figure I think makes some people not give him
his due and then at the same time sometimes certain fans may be go overboard but uh they
remember the knee that Ben Askren got knocked out with by Mosserdahl I mean that was an amazing
unbelievable thing but three inches to the right three inches to the left I guess whichever side
his head wasn't now you could have been square but uh and that fight starts with Ben Askren on
top of you in the first five seconds well Connor ran and threw a knee just like that it could be
even could be got right around it that could have easily gone the other way can you imagine what
would have happened if after the after coming back from boxing um after coming back from from
the Mayweather fight Connor rocks could be in the first 10 seconds it's over and you're like
he would it would have been intolerable but basically yeah like you know but see here's
the thing let me actually push back slightly uh I mean no please to the fans correct me if I'm wrong
but Connor seems to because I've competed a lot and like there's a tension there's a negativity
sometimes depending on the opponent and there's a respect afterwards that happens like when you
understand that there's a deep like respect and almost like love for each other like I always seen
that in Connor like all the trash talk afterwards yes there's a it's it's a subtle thing you can't
always see it but there's a respect like I agree and like that I almost on the Khabib side I almost
feel like Khabib really took it personally he didn't he didn't he lost the respect for Connor
I thought the whole time Connor had the respect so I what I wanted to say is like if Connor won
that fight like Rock Khabib I could see like I wouldn't see trash talking I could see like
trash talking stop right there I think so too but at the same time I'm sure you recall like Connor
Connor crossing some pretty personal territory you know both religiously and and also familiarly
with with Khabib and it's you know I mean I think it's the sort of thing that I don't know it's
an interesting that's one of the reasons like you have to know the difference so obviously I know the
the Khabib the Dagestani people they don't play around like that they don't play around like that
you know I mean they take offense to basically and I mean you don't do that so
so like Connor didn't maybe he did on purpose or maybe he wasn't even just aware of totally fair
of uh it was cultural differences you know the box he opened like you you can talk to
Floyd Mayweather you can you can go anywhere with him you can you can say the most offensive things
but with Khabib it's hard lines but you um I mean a lot of people ask I know you're a featherweight
but if you were to uh face it feels like Khabib was one of the hardest puzzles to solve
in in all of mixed martial arts if you were to face Khabib do you think how would you go about
solving that puzzle like almost the question is almost from a jiu jitsu perspective too
what do you do with a guy that's exceptionally good at controlling position especially on top very
good at wrestling and taking down and controlling position like let's say so forget maybe striking
on the ground how do you solve that guy like what do you do with your guard if you get taken down
or do you create an entire system of not getting taken down or escaping is like what what ideas do
you have for that well I guess I would say in my mind fighting is a game of trading energy
kind of uh you know there's two there's two things there's damage and there's energy
so like when I say energy I mean like a tired not tired how much how much gas you've got
um and then damage counts obviously as well um you could be feeling I could be feeling great and
then you get to kick me in the head hard really hard three times it doesn't matter that I could
get up and run a mile I can't get up so anyway um you know I think what Khabib does is so well
is he makes the fight look like it could be an amagamado fight um he does a great job of avoiding
damage on the feet for the most part and really sucking the life out of people with how suffocating
and oppressive as his control is um his chain wrestling is as good as anyone we've ever seen
in the UFC it's fantastic um but uh that poses a really serious threat for people that need to
maintain a certain amount of space and try to hurt him on the feet because unless they're able to
inflict an adequate amount of damage they're gonna each time let's say for instance let's say him
taking them down as a foregone conclusion at some point um if every single time Khabib takes you
down you get right back up it's not the big deal um because it's actually more we've all experienced
this let's say you and I are rolling you tapped me 15 times in one round who's more tired probably
you are yeah what my ass so badly that that it's like you're the only one working but um
so if you're comfortable with the up and down of it like being taken down if you're if you
don't if you don't get hurt badly or tired on the bottom you have a chance but that doesn't
involve just cracking him on the feet before he gets a hold of you uh that's a lot that's a lot
to ask that's a lot to ask that's difficult to do it seemed actually like Connor it seemed like it
when he was being kind of taken down or the the take down attempts against Khabib he seemed to be
somewhat relaxed the whole thing I thought he was doing well actually I think that particularly
for the first round I thought he did a very good job it's just one of those things that I think like
uh could be being could the fight's taking place in Khabib's world in large part and I mean set
aside that one giant uh what is it right hand that that Khabib hit Connor with that by the way
Connor reacted like an absolute champion he got crushed by that overhand and then drop and his
eyes went right back on Khabib it was immediate positive great response so even though that was
I think that was a bit of a surprising thing Connor reacted really really well but if you're
going to be on bottom with Khabib for four rounds that's going to be tough and also Connor's a way
better grappler than people like to give him credit for but he's not the type of grappler that can do
that can that's too tall of an order but there are grapplers that could do that or at least would
have a much much better shot at uh being able to weather that type of a storm do you see yourself
being able to be relaxed through that kind of storm yes well I guess I remember being punch it
being being being savagely beaten is very relaxing the timing of that answer was like okay
okay that's a dumb question no that's ultimately the goal of Jiu Jitsu is to um be relaxed through
the fire for sure and remember like every usc fighter I win all hypothetical matchups yeah
that's true uh since uh I'm one to ask ridiculous questions and we've been talking about sci fi and
all that kind of stuff let me ask the kind of big question that everybody disagrees about
certainly with me is who are the top five greatest MMA fighters of all time oh man and um
why is Fedor number one okay well first off Fedor is number one oh really oh you agree right there
with you really oh yeah talk about people that just get completely under appreciated even though
he's never been like he's never succeeded in the UFC it's not his fault it came along after him
at the time that at the time that Fedor was at his height the UFC was not where it was at for
heavyweight fighting I mean not that there weren't good heavyweights there but Fedor Fedor was
unbelievable you know I mean you remember I mean in Minotaur Noguera I was a massive fan of him I
still remember watching uh was it Pride 2004 when when Noguera fought CroCup and got blasted with
that left kick and dropped with like seconds left in the first round Pride was great because
that 10 minute first round in that five minute second which again materially alters alters the
fight big time and you know just the texture of the fight because it's totally it's borderline
different sport you know then then getting a five a pause and a five but anyway similar sports like
one of those swimming things where they have nine gold medals for different types of swimming right
but still swimming but anyway um oh yeah that they would disagree yeah I don't mean I'm not trying
to but it's so it's totally true ten ten minutes is different than five minutes sorry I think don't
don't don't drown me swimmers I don't swim very well it's easy for me to easy me to downplay it but
anyway uh uh yeah and then no better than uh John Jones like the modern era well I mean I guess it's
tough to compare to compare across eras it would be like going and saying like oh man how how would
such and such great grappler from today fair against someone from 1995 I'm like well probably
pretty well for them depending upon who they are what's going on you know there's some people that
would their skill sets might transition across eras but a lot of times not but that's not fair we
get that they'll be like comparing Spartans to modern day you know like army guys they're like
well who's gonna win like well did modern day army guys get modern day weapons well yeah but
who's the toughest ruggedest group of people at the very least so I guess it's it's tough to say
but at least in my mind the people that I think about for great fighters their their quality of
opposition um their level of like lasting and like success their level of lasting innovation
like the courage that they have to demonstrate because again it's like being a big fish in a
small pond takes no courage doesn't mean that there's nothing there but it it just requires
something a little bit different so Kazushi Sakuraba is one of my guys too um BJ Penn also I mean
BJ Penn fought Lyoto Machida that's insane you know it's that was a time it was a different sport
it was a different time in the sport where you know they were some guys were were bouncing around
doing different things but let's so I guess the Gracie family it's I mean they never had an
in like obviously Hoist was there um but they never and that was a definitely a different sport
weight classes being open things like that but you have to say that Hoist is up there oh no question
one of the greatest ever I think so too and and again I wouldn't be sitting here talking to you
if it weren't for him so the Gracie family as a whole but I mean who's the better I mean I think
Hoist would tell you himself probably that Hickson would have handled business back then
but they didn't put him in so again he's the greatest fighter the greatest fighter the greatest
fighter that we saw do his business so Hoist up there for sure what about so this is like nobody
seems to agree with me on this but like this connects to soccer again and messy it seems that
people value like how long you've been a champion how many like defenses of the championship that
you've had successfully to me I highly value singular moments of genius so like like I don't
like if you look at Conor McGregor he hasn't I guess held I've been a champion very long very
much he didn't defend either title right he didn't defend any other either of the titles
but like if you're talking and same with messy if you look at uh Leonel messy there's just moments
of brilliance unlike any other in history for both Conor and messy and people don't seem to give
credits like well how many World Cups have you on but to me like why is it about this arbitrary
World Cup thing or championship thing I think it's easier for people to wrap their head around
right it's like the NFL Combine when was I mean yeah numbers it's something well again if I go and
if I pick Tom Brady in the first round you know and it works out they call me a genius if I pick
Tom Brady in the first round after his combine and it doesn't work out I get fired and I'm never
hired again I have to work work somewhere else but it's like I'm insulating myself from criticism
I think almost if I go by the numbers well he had more bench presses it's like how many times
have the guys that are like the super studs in the uh in the NFL Combine ever been on the greatest
players in the NFL history in NFL history like zero or close to zero and even if even if there's
some it's certainly not a one to one correlation so it's so funny though I think it's just like how
many how long how many days did he hold the title your title reign was x times longer that means
nothing so if we want to define greatest fighter ever like you said I think individual moments of
like you're like that was transcended that was different that was something else because people
can win or lose for any number of different reasons and that it's an interesting thing again I don't
blame Argentina not winning the World Cup on Messi you know that's not fair you know how many
times is you know I mean I'll use the I remember when Trent Ilfer was the quarterback for the uh
the Baltimore Ravens and they had such a strong defense I'm not trying to pick on Trent Ilfer
but it's like they had such a strong defense that they were to make that was the Ray Lewis you know
Chris McAllister era you know and they they won they won the Super Bowl I don't think anyone is
going to say that you know Trent Dilfer's a better quarterback than you know or put him in the same
category as Dan Marino but he got the W he's got the he's got the Super Ring how many times let's
use March Mantis or Super Bowl I love it like that that guy always makes the finals but he just never
gets it done yeah so let me get this straight get into the finals nine times doesn't count because
you didn't win the end game I'm not saying it wouldn't be better but that guy won the game once he
got over the hump well how many other times was he in the finals zero you're like all right yeah
it's interesting well we yeah that we were obsessed with these numbers like um well because we can't
assess their method right well I think most of the time most of us can't assess the method of
anything it's like oh look at that guy do x y swimming I'm like how do I know Michael Phelps
is great I don't know he was faster I can't look at his technique and say anything other than
well that's way better than anything I know how to do but I can't say the difference between him
and the next guy so I guess that's I wonder if it's like I need a concrete identifier and a lot of
times people don't like saying I don't know and most people won't put like Aranda Rousey in the top
even 20 or 50 of but like she changed more than more than almost anybody else she changed the
martial arts history I don't know if that even I don't think I'm over exaggerating that she
she she made it okay for women to be fighters yeah and it and like changed the way we see
like she's one of the great feminists of our time in her own way yeah in you know in a weird
kind of way that like I don't know uh maybe I'm just a Aranda Rousey fan but the yeah the but
she's not in the conversation because then you start converting into numbers well how many
did she is she among the greatest fighters or did she do the greatest things you know I mean I
don't I think it's something I mean obviously Aranda is a great judoka who was competing in
MMA at a time when a lot of the girls like where did you get your skills in the olympics
how would you get yours high school you're like yeah you're gonna olympic girls gonna beat you up
but uh I I guess that that doesn't diminish her just that accomplishment is what it is I don't
have to I don't fade or is not diminished by the fact that he would like if he were to fight
steep and meoches right now it probably wouldn't go great or that John Jones exists I don't now
have to like knock fade or his accomplishments down or say oh because BJ Penn or someone so let's say
has a mixed record at this point that somehow invalidates the things that they've done before
I guess it kind of brings us back to a lot of the other people we've talked about the fact that
the the brilliant people throughout history that we love or some of the monsters throughout history
that we rightly revile in a lot of cases were complicated people and their legacy is more
than just one thing and someone doing something amazing doesn't involve doesn't mean they didn't
do anything bad and someone doing terrible things doesn't doesn't mean that doesn't invalidate the
positives that they did but I guess we're fighting the urge to put people in one category and same
with ourselves I think that's why people get depressed oh I'm good right now oh I'm bad right
now versus hey we're all of work in progress and we're trying to do x number of things and legacy
is a tough thing to figure out anyway and it's all speculative last time or no on reddit you said
that last time too that you don't experience much fear before fights I'd like to ask you a
couple Mike Tyson things if it's okay it's just interesting to me maybe I'm just weird so there's
a I don't know if you've seen this clip of Tyson talking about how he feels leading up to a fight
that he's kind of overtaken with fear as he gets closer and closer and closer to the ring
as confidence grows have you seen the clip I'm aware of it okay it's in a while here let me play
it for you I think George St. Pierce it's something similar to me one time while I'm in the dressing
room five minutes before I come out my gloves are laced up I'm breaking my glove down I'm
pushing the level of the back of my leg breaking the middle of the glove for my knuckle pierced
through the left I feel my knuckle piercing against the tight leather gloves on the last
buckling when I come out I have supreme confidence I'm scared to death I'm totally afraid I'm afraid
of everything I'm afraid of I'm afraid of being humiliated but I'm totally confident close I get
to a ring more confidence I get closer more confidence I get closer more confidence I get
all during my training I've been afraid of this man I thought this man might be capable of beating
me I've dreamed of him beating me but I always stayed afraid of him but it was close I get to
tell me I'm more confident once I'm in the ring I'm a god no one could beat me I'm a god I mean
first of all he's cognizant of both his demons and whatever the hell ideas he has about violence
is so interesting is there something about the the tension that he's describing about being
confident and scared that resonates with you or do you hold to this idea that you've kind of
spoken about before that you're really not afraid no I can I can appreciate what he's saying you
know I think that you know I can speak to feeling like concerned about let's say for instance if
you feel a certain way I think people are a lot more like computers than we like to admit
and just because a lot of times I can't parse what's going on and why doesn't mean that it's not
it doesn't make sense I see and and I think that at least in the times of like if I'm concerned
about a situation or about a person or about something happening prior to the fight or I'm
like there's a reason there there was a reason I don't have to push that down and bury it there's
a reason like why what have I not thought about what have I not done what am I missing why am I
feeling this way as you mentioned you know for yourself prior like you'd be like why am I feeling
like this I don't do this very well in certain aspects of my life if I'm not that I mentioned
it or not I think about it but when it comes to competing I think I do an all right job and I'm
trying to learn to be better and it's uh and going like well why do I if I feel this way
there's a reason okay am I thinking about this the wrong way have I not adequately prepared for
something I have to I have to address it and then maybe I'll be up for four hours that night you
know like extra hours thinking like one if I not address watching sparring watching this watching
that and then that when I when I am thinking about things more more accurately or when I've
addressed what that concern was I feel any of that concern kind of dissipate and I guess uh
if I honestly thought that you know I guess when it comes I know I'm gonna die at a certain point
obviously I'm gonna get hurt I mean you know pain happens but the pain of loss would be nothing
compared to the or the pain of injury be nothing compared to the pain of of running away you know
and yeah and so I guess if I think about it where's my value what it's like I feel like I'm a winner
every single time I step into that ring and fight with everything that I have I can't promise that
I'll win my next fight I know that I have the skills and the tools to beat anyone in grappling or
in mixed martial arts at this point it's just I I know that for certain I've trained with enough
people I compete with enough people I know I know where I stand but I also know that I'm not perfect
and also the the better fighter even if I perceive that I was that thing doesn't win on the night the
the man who fights better wins on the night and if I give credence in my mind to only the person
that's that's one has value versus going what's your process what's your path through this how
are you going about this how are you thinking about this how are you behaving then if I can
focus on the process then then I will respect my opponent and I will respect myself and I'll
respect anyone that behaves with with a certain level of consistency to that and they could win
there's plenty of winners in history that that are shit bags and there's plenty of losers that are
not but winning doesn't make you a bad or good person and losing doesn't make you good by the
fault either or bad by the fault so and I think that that can be the truth socially that can be
the truth you know athletically and you know academically so I guess is there a primal fear
though like a primal fear of getting hurt the running away and not facing the the threat
long term is the bigger pain than any pain you can experience in the fight
that's pretty powerful but what about the violence of I mean you don't have that on your face but
like the I don't know if you've also seen Tyson talk about he was on Rogan recently he was talking about
how he was trying to psychoanalyze himself about why he enjoys violence so much I mean he called it
orgasmic I don't know have you seen that clip I haven't okay we're playing we're playing it
because I can I need to because Trump also retweeted it which is hilarious I don't know
how to contextualize yeah that's that our president retweeted the clip of uh of yeah let's say
of Tyson saying that's just maybe he's just doing like they're not gonna it's like I'm gonna throw
him a curveball no one's gonna have any idea what that but yeah he did no explanation just here you
go there you go well I think that's kind of like what you're describing it's like if I give you an
answer it has to be a good one better to just let your imagination run exactly yeah he's yeah he's
like the Kubrick of our time no it's really interesting that sometimes um period it's not real but
sometimes I struggle with the fact of why is the possibility I can really hurt somebody like you
don't want to hurt them what do you mean but you struggle struggle with the possibility that you
could hurt them that is sometimes it's orgasmic sometimes hmm yeah like some fights like particular
like Tyrell Biggs or someone that you had problems with someone that you Joe's not getting you had
animosity towards so when you finally get your hands on them hey um what does it mean um when
fighting gets you get you erect what does that mean it's a good question means you're getting
excited yeah so that that's going through your mind right now well that's how I get when I was a
kid and I you know sometimes I get the twinkle the twinkle yeah well that's what I'm saying it's
like you reached a state as a human being as a champion as a ferocious fighter you reached a state
of of ability and of accomplishment that very few humans will ever ever touch and feel that's
why I'm asking you when you're running when you're hitting the bag when that heart's beating again
and that you know who you are your mic motherfucking Tyson so when you're doing all this shit again
you're still Mike Tyson those thoughts have got to be burning inside you again it's got to be pretty
wild I don't know it's um it's wild but I'm I believe it's um it's rightfully so to be that way
and I just know how to um I don't think I'm mastered but I just know how to deal with it I don't let
it overwhelm me I mean he goes on to try to they don't ever like Joe doesn't bite well the interesting
thing about that conversation is Mike was trying to figure himself out yeah like he's trying on
the spot like why do I feel this way uh is to me it was like to me it's so real and honest to uh
to feel like pleasure from hurting somebody like that you rarely hear that in this society
it's like you rarely like talk about like you feel pleasure from winning you feel pleasure from like
the relief of overcoming like all the stress you have to go through pleasure from
just like the specifics of the fight the techniques he used the maybe overcoming being down a couple
rounds but like how often do you hear somebody say I just enjoyed he's not even saying because
I hate the opponent he's saying like I enjoyed purely the violence of it that's crazy I mean I
don't know it's honest it it made me ask like I wonder how many of us are cognizant of that
I'd say Mike is uncommonly seemingly uh honest I think athletes make a full time job out of lying
you know I think people make a full time job that's fair I mean in some you tell yourself
or you tell others what you feel you need to or maybe whether you even know what you feel you
need to but why should he not I mean again did he did he run up and just hit somebody that's
didn't sign up for this no they they sign up to be there well that's the interesting thing
about Dyson is there's that weird uh like nonstandard behavior I mean like your fighting style is
nonstandard he's nonstandard to another degree of like uh who else has that in jiu jitsu uh uh
Polaris has this kind of weirdness like what's what's in there like there's a fear that I think
uh most opponents would have because it's like it's no longer about like it takes you out of the
realm of its game it takes us back to the thing we were talking about like before is it strips away
that like several layers of Ryan Hall the the podcast uh guest Ryan Hall the jiu jitsu instructor
Ryan Hall the jitsu competitor he keeps going down to a point where like Ryan Hall the murderer
of all things that get in his way that lies underneath all of it seemingly like if we're
like in this society we put all that aside but it makes you wonder like now society's
being tested in in many ways it makes you wonder like what's underneath there well do we want do
we want the answer to that because I guess it's what is it uh you seen Paul fiction you know the
best character in the movie and in the best scene in the movie is like if my questions
here if you're what he called it my answer is scary you should cease asking scary questions
you know and I guess uh you wonder I mean all of us that's something that I think it's funny
we call that's not okay I mean versus maybe not appropriate for situation x y or z but uh
what should make any of us think I mean humanity is a different place now and I'm not saying
anything crazy out there but it can manage a different place now than we were 5 000 years ago
where all of us are descended from people who have killed things with their teeth and fingernails
in order to be where we are and whether it was in whether it was an animal or it was in conflict
with another person I mean think about that the chances of dying by violence now are so so slim
at least in in most countries in most places like shockingly small thankfully but there was a period
of time like the most period of time where dying by violence was mostly how it went down and I guess
what would be facilitative what would allow you to win back to Ender's game you know what allows you
you if you can't do that you are always you are forever subject to people who can and that's
that's a real thing and you know we're fortunate to find ourselves in a situation where we don't
where other things matter but that is a funny thing periodically where people you'll see people
like kind of jawing at each other like in videos or out in the world that clearly neither of them
expect this to get serious like I'm just going to yell at you you're going to yell at me and it's
like this weird larping thing we're both going to go on in a separate way all it takes is one
person to be like well I wasn't kidding yeah and it's like oh you'll go to jail I'm like oh I know
you're going to go to the morgue and it's that's but that can happen like that like society I mean
obviously anyway you could jump across the table stab me in the eye I mean I appreciate I'd hope if
you don't and there will be consequences if you do but not from not from me from from the rest of
society will potentially get you at a certain point but you can decide to not play by the rules
anytime you want and it's fascinating that yeah that's we've created rules based on which we all
behave but underneath there you know there there's things that doesn't the there's motivations and
forces that don't play by the rules and still there nature's metal is under the surface seriously
and again I pull out my phone and I'm basically saying like hey I'm gonna you're gonna get caught
yeah but really I'm further antagonizing you rightly or wrongly you know what I mean like
and that that's an interesting thing and I feel like just people need to remember any of us need
to remember just for any reason just that's that's one step away at all at all times you ever I've
had people say to me before like oh I don't feel safe I'm like you're not safe I kill you before
you get out of this room nothing you do stop that nothing I mean but don't worry you can do the same
to me which means I'm like oh oh thank goodness can you imagine like how many guns are there are in
this country like I mean everywhere I mean seriously everywhere but that's a heartening thought not the
other way because people usually freak out and go oh my god gun violence gun violence is a gun
violence is like really not a serious issue in the United States compared to what it could be
because it means that I mean with the amount of guns and the amount of bullets that are out there
that are in circulation can you imagine if like one in every thousand was used in anger each day
I mean this would be a terrifying place to live you couldn't go anywhere so I mean although you
could say hey this is more than we'd like or x y z it actually means that people are much more
reasonable and sane than than we're saying then or then I then sometimes I might I might argue so I
guess what I mean is like oh man I walked to 7 11 and I didn't get stabbed I'm like oh well that's
good because not because I protected myself with my karate it's basically no one decided to run over
and stab me because I wasn't protecting myself it's like they they stopped so I guess we're all
fortunate to live in a society that that like you said nature being metal doesn't become that big of
an issue all the time but it is funny when you get people in the ring and you go hey let's peel back
from mr. Tyson many layers of that and say hey now it's okay and it's cool that I mean that's what
society is doing so I've lived in Harvard Square for a while and we add extra layers of what safe
means like now there's a discourse about safe spaces about like ideas being violence or or like
uh you know like yeah but the ideas or minor slights against your personality being violence
but that's all like extra layers around the nature is metal thing that uh it's cool that's
that's what progress is but we can't forget that like underneath it is still it's still the the
thing that will murder at the at the drop of uh in any at any moment if uh if aroused one thing
that I find funny though or ironic maybe about the uh the you know words of violence you know
offenses violence thing is that of course that if that the belief in that then justifies my violence
like my and whether maybe my maybe not physical violence but my response to my my aggressive
response to things and I guess like which again be grets be gets a further aggressive response
and like a you know kind of a tit for tat sort of situation or or it goes to like well there's 10
of me and there's one of you so we'll get you and you can't do anything about it but that's not
morality that's that's just saying that's might makes right so I guess again you can understand
why people do it and there are certain there is a progress aspect to it but again I guess without
proper examination I'm effectively with my 10 friends you know and and the force of the law
Mike Tysoning people but not admitting to myself what I'm doing and at least Mike Tyson again is
honest are you uh afraid of death I mean it's easy for me to say no as I sit here probably not about
to die but is this the UFC question can you defeat any opponent exactly the answer is of
course yes and uh I don't have they're not around they're not here are they yeah exactly but uh I
mean are you uh do you ponder your own mortality maybe another context to that is you mentioned
two deaths for martial artists I think that's actually why honestly even though it had a
relatively young age I think mortality is something that I'm aware of more maybe more than the average
person I think probably most athletes can speak to this and anyone that's had for a while I've
managed to slide out of a couple near death experiences personally you know mostly river
related um because I'm an idiot but um I regret nothing but uh yeah yeah but uh thank god we're
but um yeah it is an interesting seeing the end and seeing going well what's gonna happen I guess I
think it comes back to kind of what we're discussing about belief structure and belief system I think a
lot of times if I recognize that no matter what I do it's all gonna end one day and then you go well
why were we here what would I do am I gonna make it to 40 I have no idea I'd like to hope so that
I had no idea that I was gonna make it to to the age that I am now um am I gonna make it to 80 how
much of that is in my control much of it is not I mean we it's so funny it's an interesting like
back to the belief structure again like locus of internal and external locus of control you know
what's facilitative versus what's true and you know I think accepting personal responsibility
for more than is on my control is is probably a positive but at the same time recognizing that
much of much is not in my control I was fortunate enough to be born in the United States fortunate
enough to you know to not to knock on wood have have a serious disease that I'm not aware of right
now um I didn't do any of that I just showed up that was really fortunate and I I guess that doesn't
diminish the fact that I've tried to make decent choices but it works in concert with it and I I
guess um when I when you go is death what I want right now no no I should think not and again it's
easier me to be relatively calm about it as I'm not staring it in the face but what I would care
a lot more about is is how you live that's what's in my control and I can't control if as I walk
out of this building a helicopter falls on me worrying about that I can't control maybe I
maybe I have cancer now and I don't know it and I really hope not but um there's something about
meditating on the fact that it could end today outside of your control they can clarify your
thinking about yeah the the fact that life is amazing like just kind of something yeah helping
you enjoy this moment even if life was horrible let's say for instance it was it was you live at
one of those times or places and this place is still existing in this world today that life
is brutal and metal and whatever all and short and painful would you still want it and again
as I'm sitting here not not on fire physically it's easy to say yes but I would I'm confident I
still I'll plant my feet and say yes any of life any life is amazing and beautiful and and a gift
an unbelievable gift uh that none of us have earned for the record and we're I hate the word
earned a lot of times earned yeah you earned but it's like there's a lot of a lot of good fortune
and earning and that's back to do I want justice or do I want grace and I guess we're all fortunate
to be where we are no matter where we are and hopefully it should give us some sense of perspective
some sense of compassion for other people but also like like you said a sense of peace if it all
ended right now would I be happy with what I with life to this point of course would you like to live
a little longer yeah I would try to do more and try to live rightly to the best that I know how
which over time will hopefully continue to evolve in a positive direction but if the answer to that
is no I I guess that's that's always that's a sign that that what I'm doing is not what I'm
meant to be doing and I'm you're familiar with the Tecumseh before so there's a I've got one
actually if you could give me 10 seconds I'll read this one out this is a personal favorite
basically and I think it sums up I mean again I it's one of those quotes on the internet like
when Abraham Lincoln said don't believe everything you read online but uh this is you know it's
again uh attributed but it's like so live your life that the fear of death can never enter your
heart trouble no one about their religion respect others in their view and demand that they respect
yours love your life perfect your life beautify all things in your life seek to make your life long
and its purpose in the service of your people prepare a noble death song for the day when you
go over the great divide always give a word or sign a salute when meeting or passing a friend
even a stranger when in a lonely place show respect to all people and grovel to none when you arise
in the morning give thanks for the food and for the joy of living if you see no reason for giving
thanks the fault lies only in yourself abuse no one and no thing for abuse turns the wise ones
to fools and robs the spirit of its vision when it comes your time to die be not like those whose
hearts are filled with the fear of death so that when their time comes they weep and pray for a
little more time to live their lives over again in a different way sing your death song and
die like a hero going home powerful words i don't think there's a better way to end it let me just
say uh we've spoke maybe five six years ago i don't even remember when but i'm not exaggerating
saying like you had a huge impact on my life because of the podcast you're the reason i was
doing the podcast as long as i have you're the reason i'm doing this podcast and it's a little
it's a stupid little meeting that you probably didn't know who i was i didn't really know who
you are it was just like a magical moment it's a bit flap of a butterfly wing kind of situation
and uh yeah i'm forever grateful you're one of the most inspiring people in my life so right
it's a huge honor that you would come here uh jen didn't talk with me and waste all this time
i really appreciate it was amazing thank you so much lex it's just been a pleasure really
appreciate you having us on thank you thanks man thanks for listening to this conversation with
ryan hall and thank you to our sponsors power dot babble and cash app please check out these
sponsors in the description to get a discount and to support this podcast if you enjoy this thing
subscribe on youtube review it with five stars an apple podcast follow on spotify support on patreon
or connect with me on twitter at lex freedman and now let me leave you with some words from frank
herbert in dune deep in the human unconscious is a pervasive need for a logical universe that makes
sense but the real universe is always one step beyond logic thank you for listening and hope to see
you next time